ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.159
UNIT 5: RECOGNITION AND DERECOGNITION OF
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The concepts of recognition and derecognition of any asset or liability refer to the timing i.e. when
is the financial instrument included in an entity's balance sheet (recognition) and when is it removed
from the entity's balance sheet (derecognition).
5.1 INITIAL RECOGNITION
As per paragraph 3.1.1 of Ind AS 109, an entity shall recognise a financial asset or a financial liability
in its balance sheet when, and only when, the entity becomes party to the contractual provisions of
the instrument.
Paragraph B3.1.2 of Ind AS 109 provides certain examples of applying the aforementioned
accounting principle:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.160
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Option contracts
When the holder or writer becomes a party to the
contract (refer note 1 below).
Planned future transactions
Never
Note 1: Generally, no upfront premium is paid by one party in a forward contract to the other at the
inception of the contract. This is indicative of the fact that the fair value of a forward contract on
inception is approximately zero. On the other hand, the option holder generally pays an upfront
premium to the option writer at the inception of the option contract. This provides evidence that there
is some fair value of the rights and obligations of the parties at the inception of an options contract.
Note 2: Contracts to buy or sell non-financial assets that can be settled net or by exchanging
financial instruments are treated as if they are financial instruments, that is, derivatives unless they
were entered into and continued to be held to meet the entity's normal purchase, sale or usage
requirements
5.2 REGULAR WAY PURCHASE OR SALE OF FINANCIAL
ASSETS
Ind AS 109 defines a regular way purchase or sale as,
a purchase or sale of a financial asset
under a contract
whose terms require delivery of the asset
within the time frame
established generally by regulation or convention in the marketplace concerned
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.161
Regular way purchase or sale of financial assets
Trade date accounting
Settlement date accounting
Trade date = date that an entity commits
itself to purchase or sell an asset
Settlement date = date that an asset is
delivered to or by an entity
Recognition of an asset to be received and the liability to pay for it
• Derecognition of an asset that is sold, recognition of any gain or loss on disposal and the recognition
of a receivable from the buyer for payment
For instance, on the Bombay Stock Exchange in India, all transactions in all groups of securities in
the Equity segment, Fixed Income securities and Government securities are settled on $uT+2^{\prime\prime}$ basis.
In this case, "T" is the trade date and $"T+2"$ is the settlement date i.e. exchange of monies and
securities between the buyers and sellers respectively takes place on second business day (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, bank and Exchange trading holidays) after the trade date.
It follows that if a contract is entered into with a broker for purchase or sale of securities which is
normally traded on the Bombay Stock Exchange, with a settlement period that differs from the norms
mentioned above, it would not be regarded as a regular way purchase or sale.
When trade date accounting is applied, the buyer of a financial asset recognises the financial asset
and its liability to pay on the trade date itself. Correspondingly, the seller derecognises the financial
asset and recognises any gain or loss on sale on the trade date. The buyer subsequently measures
the financial asset in accordance with its classification category.
When settlement date accounting is applied, a buyer of financial asset accounts for any change
in the fair value of the asset to be received during the period between the trade date and the
settlement date in the same way as it accounts for the acquired asset. In other words,
assets measured at amortised cost - change in value is not recognised;
assets classified as financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss (whether
mandatorily or designated) - change in value is recognised in profit or loss;
financial assets measured at fair value through other comprehensive income (including
investments in equity instruments for which irrevocable option is selected)  change in fair
value is recognised in other comprehensive income.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.162
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Correspondingly, the seller of a financial asset derecognises the same at the settlement date and
does not recognise any fair value changes between the trade date and settlement date.
An entity shall apply the same method consistently for all purchases and sales of financial assets
that are classified in the same way in accordance with Ind AS 109.
Illustration 1: Regular way contracts: forward contracts
ST Ltd. enters into a forward contract to purchase 10 lakh shares of ABC Ltd. in a month's time for
50 per share. This contract is entered into with a broker, Mr. AG and not through regular trading
mode in a stock exchange. The contract requires Mr. AG to deliver the shares to ST Ltd. upon
payment of agreed consideration. Shares of ABC Ltd. are traded on a stock exchange. Regular way
delivery is two days. Assess the forward contract.
Solution
In this case, the forward contract is not a regular way transaction and hence must be accounted for
as a derivative i.e. between the date of entering into the contract to the date of delivery, all fair value
changes are recognised in profit or loss.
*****
Illustration 2: Regular way contracts: option contracts
NKT Ltd. purchases a call option in a public market permitting it to purchase 100 shares of VT Ltd.
at any time over the next one month at a price of  1,000 per share. If NKT Ltd. exercises its option,
it has 7 days to settle the transaction according to regulation or convention in the options market.
VT Ltd.'s shares are traded in an active public market that requires two-day settlement.
Solution
In this case, the options contract is a regular way transaction as the settlement of the option is
governed by regulation or convention in the marketplace for options. Fair value changes between
the trade date and settlement date are recognised in profit or loss.
*****
The illustrations below explain the flow of journal entries in case of trade date accounting and
settlement date accounting for regular way purchase and sale of financial assets.
Illustration 3: Regular way purchase of financial asset
On 1 January 20X1, X Ltd. enters into a contract to purchase a financial asset for 10 lakhs, which is
its fair value on trade date. On 4 January 20X1 (settlement date), the fair value of the asset is
10.5 lakhs. The amounts to be recorded for the financial asset will depend on how it is classified and
whether trade date or settlement date accounting is used. Pass necessary journal entries.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.163
Solution
Journal Entries in the Buyer's Books
Trade date accounting
Settlement date accounting
The above mentioned accounting principles apply only to financial assets and Ind AS 109 does
not contain any such principles for financial liabilities.
*****
5.3 DERECOGNITION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS
In simple words, derecognition refers to the timing of removing a financial asset from the balance
sheet. To take an example, if a company gets its trade receivables discounted from a bank, it would
need to determine whether it can remove those trade receivables from its balance sheet.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.164
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Paragraph B3.2.1 of Ind AS 109 provides a step-by-step flowchart for making this determination.
Consolidate all subsidiaries (see note 1 below)
Determine whether the derecognition principles are applied to a part or all of an asset (or group of similar
Yes
assets) (see note 2 below)
Have the rights to the cash flows from the asset
expired? (see note 3 below)
No
Has the entity transferred its right to receive cash
flows? (see note 4 below)
No
Has the entity assumed a contractual obligation
to pay the cash flows in an arrangement that
meets three conditions? (see note 5 below)
Yes
Derecognise the asset
No
Continue to recognise the
asset
Yes
Has the entity transferred substantially all
risks and rewards? (see note 6 below)
Yes
Derecognise the asset
No
Yes
Has the entity retained substantially all risks
and rewards? (see note 6 below)
Continue to recognise
the asset
No
Has the entity retained control of the asset?
(see note 7 below)
Yes
Continue to recognise the asset
No
Derecognise the asset
Notes:
1.
In consolidated financial statements, accounting principles for derecognition are applied at
a consolidated level. Hence, an entity first consolidates all subsidiaries in accordance with
Ind AS 110 and then applies those requirements to the resulting group. (Ind AS 109.3.2.1)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.165
The importance of this criteria is that sometimes sales of financial assets are made to entities
which are specifically designed for this purpose. In those circumstances, it would be
inappropriate to derecognise the financial asset if the purchaser entity is indirectly controlled
by the seller entity.
Let's understand this step using a few fact patterns:
i.
Illustration 4: Part of a financial asset
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
ii.
iii.
Interest strip of an interest-bearing financial asset i.e. the part entitles its holder to
interest cash flows of a financial asset
Dividend strip of an equity share i.e. the part entitles its holder to only dividends
arising from an equity share
Cash flows (principal and asset) upto a certain tenure or first right on a proportion
of cash flows of an amortising financial asset. Say, the part entitles its holder to first
80% of the cash flows or cash flows for first 4 of the 6 years' tenure.
Solution
Derecognition requirements are applied to a part of a financial asset if that part meets any of
the following three conditions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
The part comprises only specifically identified cash flows from a financial asset (or
a group of similar financial assets).
For example, when an entity enters into an interest rate strip whereby the counterparty
obtains the right to the interest cash flows, but not the principal cash flows from a debt
instrument, derecognition principles are applied to the interest cash flows
The part comprises only a fully proportionate (pro rata) share of the cash flows
from a financial asset (or a group of similar financial assets).
For example, when an entity enters into an arrangement whereby the counterparty
obtains the rights to a 90 per cent share of all cash flows of a debt instrument,
derecognition principles are applied to 90 per cent of those cash flows.
The part comprises only a fully proportionate (pro rata) share of specifically
identified cash flows from a financial asset (or a group of similar financial assets).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.166
FINANCIAL REPORTING
For example, when an entity enters into an arrangement whereby the counterparty
obtains the rights to a 90 per cent share of interest cash flows from a financial asset,
derecognition principles are applied to 90 per cent of those interest cash flows.
The example of a part of a financial asset at (iii) in Illustration 4 above will not qualify
conditions at (b) and (c) above since it does not represent pro rata share of all or
specifically identified cash flows.
In (b) and (c) above, if there is more than one counterparty, each counterparty is not
required to have a proportionate share of the cash flows provided that the transferring
entity has a fully proportionate share.
In all other cases, derecognition principles are applied to the financial asset in its
entirety (or to the group of similar financial assets in their entirety).
*****
Illustration 5: Part of a financial asset
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
i.
Entity Y transfers the rights to the first or the last 90 per cent of cash collections
from a financial asset (or a group of financial assets)
3.
ii.
Entity Z transfers the rights to 90 per cent of the cash flows from a group of
receivables, but provides a guarantee to compensate the buyer for any credit losses
up to 8 per cent of the principal amount of the receivables.
Solution
In the above circumstances, Entity Y and Entity Z need to apply the derecognition
requirements to the financial asset (or a group of similar financial assets) in its entirety.
*****
Cash flows from a financial asset expire upon payment of entire due amount or the legal
release of the debtor by the creditor from the obligation to pay. In case of derivatives, this
condition is considered met when, for example, contractual exercise period of an option
expires and option is not exercised.
Ind AS 109 contains elaborate guidance on when renegotiation of the terms of a financial
liability results in derecognition thereof. Refer paragraph "Exchange of financial liability
instruments" for more details on the same. However, in respect of financial assets, such
elaborate guidance has not been provided.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.
5.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.167
One may use the principles of quantitative and qualitative tests prescribed for financial
liabilities to evaluate whether renegotiation of the terms of a financial asset results in
derecognition or not.
We discuss below a few circumstances wherein renegotiation does result in "expiry of right
to receive cash flows":
Agreeing to a moratorium period for repayment of principal or extension of the overall
tenor of the loan.
Substantial reduction in the interest rates
Agreeing to a right to convert loan or a part thereof into equity shares after a certain
period of time
Examples of transfer of rights to receive cash flows include sale of a financial asset, such as
an investment in a debenture or assignment of a receivable (like factoring arrangements with
banks or financial institutions). Refer comprehensive examples below on debt factoring and
invoice discounting.
In some situations, though an entity retains the contractual rights to receive cash flows of a
financial asset ('original asset'), it does assume a contractual obligation to pay those cash
flows to one or more entities ('eventual recipients').
For example, securitisation arrangements are a common form of transfer of financial assets
in India. In these arrangements, the originator of a financial asset, say a bank or a NBFC,
settle a Trust and transfer a portfolio of financial assets to that Trust. Thereafter, securities
of that Trust are issued to unrelated parties or investors. Such arrangements are often "pass
through" arrangements, in the sense that the originator or the Trust retains the rights to
receive cash flows from the financial asset, but they have a simultaneous obligation to pay
those cash flows to a recipient.
As per paragraph 3.2.5 of Ind AS 109, all of the following conditions need to be met in such
situations for the transaction to qualify as a "transfer":
The entity has no obligation to pay amounts to the eventual recipients unless it
collects equivalent amounts from the original asset.
Short-term advances by the entity with the right of full recovery of the amount lent plus
accrued interest at market rates do not violate this condition. However, existence of
guarantees or options that allow the transferee to transfer receivables back to the
entity and other recourse arrangements are likely to conflict with this condition.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.168
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The entity is prohibited by the terms of the transfer contract from selling or pledging
the original asset other than as security to the eventual recipients for the obligation
to pay them cash flows.
The entity has an obligation to remit any cash flows it collects on behalf of the
eventual recipients without material delay.
entity is not entitled to reinvest such cash flows, except for investments in cash or cash
equivalents during the short settlement period, and interest earned on such
investments is passed to the eventual recipients.
The standard does not define the word "material" in this condition. Therefore, the same
should be understood in common trade parlance.
Illustration 6: Proportionate "pass through" arrangement
Entity A makes a five-year interest-bearing loan (the 'original asset') of  100 crores to
Entity B. Entity A settles a Trust and transfers the loan to that Trust. The Trust issues
participatory notes to an investor, Entity C, that entitle the investor to the cash flows from the
asset.
As per Trust's agreement with Entity C, in exchange for a cash payment of ₹90 crores, Trust
will pass to Entity C 90% of all principal and interest payments collected from Entity B (as,
when and if collected). Trust accepts no obligation to make any payments to Entity C other
than 90% of exactly what has been received from Entity B. Trust provides no guarantee to
Entity C about the performance of the loan and has no rights to retain 90% of the cash
collected from Entity B nor any obligation to pay cash to Entity C if cash has not been received
from Entity B.
Compute the amount to be derecognised.
Solution
If the three conditions are met, the proportion sold is derecognised, provided the entity has
transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership. Thus, Entity A would report
a loan asset of 10 crores and derecognise 90 crores.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.169
Let's illustrate the "risks and rewards" test with certain examples given in application guidance
of Ind AS 109:
Examples of when an entity has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of
ownership are:
(a)
an unconditional sale of a financial asset;
(b)
(c)
a sale of a financial asset together with an option to repurchase the financial asset at
its fair value at the time of repurchase; and
a sale of a financial asset together with a put or call option that is deeply out of the
money (ie an option that is so far out of the money it is highly unlikely to go into the
money before expiry).
Examples of when an entity has retained substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership
are:
a sale and repurchase transaction where the repurchase price is a fixed price or the
sale price plus a lender's return;
(a)
(b)
a securities lending agreement;
(c)
(d)
(e)
a sale of a financial asset together with a total return swap that transfers the market
risk exposure back to the entity;
a sale of a financial asset together with a deep in-the-money put or call option (ie an
option that is so far in the money that it is highly unlikely to go out of the money before
expiry); and
a sale of short-term receivables in which the entity guarantees to compensate the
transferee for credit losses that are likely to occur.
Paragraph 3.2.7 of Ind AS 109 provides the guidance on "risks and rewards" test
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.170
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Change in exposure to the variability in the present value of
the future net cash flows from the financial asset
Not significant
Significant
Entity has retained substantially all the
risks and rewards of ownership of
financial asset
Entity has transferred substantially all
the risks and rewards of ownership of
financial asset
Example entity has sold a
financial asset subject to an
agreement to buy it back at a
fixed price or the sale price plus
a lender's return
Example
entity has sold a financial asset
subject only to an option to buy it back at its fair
value at the time of repurchase or has
transferred a fully proportionate share of the
cash flows from a larger financial asset in an
arrangement, such as a loan sub-participation
In evaluating the extent to which risks and rewards are transferred or retained, risks and
rewards that are reasonably expected to be significant in practice should be considered.
So, what is the most significant risk in a portfolio of short term receivables? It is usually credit
risk i.e. the risk that the customer will default. Therefore, an arrangement that involves the
transferee having full recourse to the transferor for credit losses will "fail" the risks
and rewards tests. An arrangement in which the transferee has no recourse to the
transferor for credit losses will generally "pass" the risks and rewards tests.
What are the most significant risks in longer term receivables? Well, interest rate risk and
slow payment risk are fairly significant in those cases. An arrangement in which the entity
continues to pay interest to the transferee until the underlying debtor settles involves the
transferee retaining the risk of slow payment.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.171
Whether the entity has retained control of the transferred asset depends on the transferee's
ability to sell the asset. If the transferee,
i.
ii.
has the practical ability to sell the asset in its entirety to an unrelated third party, and
is able to exercise that ability unilaterally and without needing to impose additional
restrictions on the transfer
the entity has not retained control.
In all other cases, the entity has retained control.
The accounting treatment as a consequence of this decision is as below:
Whether entity has retained control of the financial asset?
No
Yes
Derecognise the financial asset
And
Continue to recognise the financial asset
And
Recognise separately as assets or
liabilities any rights and obligations
created or retained in the transfer
Recognise the financial asset to the
extent of its continuing involvement in
the financial asset
The critical question is what the transferee is able to do in practice, not what contractual rights
the transferee has concerning what it can do with the transferred asset or what contractual
prohibitions exist.
Paragraphs B3.2.7 and 3.2.8 give examples of certain situations in which transferee is
evaluated to have such practical ability and situations in which it doesn't have.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.172
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 1: Situation when transferee has practical ability to sell the financial asset
Transferred asset is subject to an option that allows the entity to repurchase it and it is
traded in an active market: transferee has the practical ability to sell the financial asset as
it can readily obtain the transferred asset in the market if the option is exercised.
Example 2: Situations when transferee doesn't have practical ability to sell the
financial asset
Transferred asset is subject to an option that allows the entity to repurchase it and
it is not traded in an active market: transferee doesn't have the practical ability to
sell the financial asset as it cannot readily obtain the transferred asset in the market
if the option is exercised.
A put option or guarantee with respect to the transferred asset which is sufficiently
valuable in the sense that it constrains the transferee from selling the transferred
asset because the transferee would, in practice, not sell the transferred asset to a
third party without attaching a similar option or other restrictive conditions. Instead,
the transferee would hold the transferred asset so as to obtain payments under the
guarantee or put option. In this situation, the transferor has retained control of the
transferred asset.
Illustrations on application of derecognition principles
Paragraph B3.2.16 of Ind AS 109 provides certain illustrations which are summarised
below:
Illustration 7: Repurchase agreements
A financial asset is sold under repurchase agreement. The repurchase price as per that
agreement is (a) fixed price or (b) sale price plus a lender's return. Let's look at three
alternate scenarios:
i.
Repurchase agreement is for the same financial asset.
ii. Repurchase agreement is for substantially the same asset
iii.
Repurchase agreement provides the transferee a right to substitute assets that are
similar and of equal fair value to the transferred asset at the repurchase date.
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.173
Solution
In each of these scenarios, the transferred financial asset is not derecognised because the
transferor retains substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
Let's look at another scenario:
Repurchase agreement provides the transferor only a right of first refusal to repurchase the
transferred asset at fair value if the transferee subsequently sells it
In this scenario, the transferred financial asset is derecognised because the transferor has
transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
*****
Illustration 8: Put options on transferred financial assets
A financial asset is sold and the transferee has a put option. Let's look at some alternate
scenarios:
i.
Put option is deeply in the money
ii. Put option is deeply out of the money.
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
Solution
In the first scenario, the transferred asset does not qualify for derecognition because the
transferor has retained substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership. However, in the
second scenario, the transferor has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of
ownership.
*****
Illustration 9: Call options on transferred financial assets
A financial asset is sold and the transferor has a call option. Let's look at some alternate
scenarios:
i.
Call option is deeply in the money
ii
Call option is deeply out of the money.
What if the transferor holds a call option on an asset that is readily obtainable in the market?
iii Call option is neither deeply in the money nor deeply out of the money
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.174
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
In the first scenario, the transferred asset does not qualify for derecognition because the
transferor has retained substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership. However, in the
second scenario, the transferor has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of
ownership.
In the third scenario, the asset is derecognised. This is because the entity (i) has neither
retained nor transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership, and (ii) has not
retained control.
*****
Illustration 10: Amortising interest rate swaps
An entity may transfer to a transferee a fixed rate financial asset that is paid off over time,
and enter into an amortising interest rate swap with the transferee to receive a fixed interest
rate and pay a variable interest rate based on a notional amount.
i.
Scenarios:
ii.
Notional amount of the swap amortises so that it equals the principal amount of the
transferred financial asset outstanding at any point in time.
Amortisation of the notional amount of the swap is not linked to the principal amount
outstanding of the transferred asset.
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
Solution
In the first scenario, the swap would generally result in the entity retaining substantial
prepayment risk, in which case the entity either continues to recognise all of the transferred
asset or continues to recognise the transferred asset to the extent of its continuing
involvement.
Such a swap would not result in the entity retaining prepayment risk on the asset. Hence, it
would not preclude derecognition of the transferred asset provided the payments on the swap
are not conditional on interest payments being made on the transferred asset and the swap
does not result in the entity retaining any other significant risks and rewards of ownership on
the transferred asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
5.3.1 Accounting treatment of transfers
5.3.1.1 Transfers that qualify for derecognition
If the arrangement results in de-recognition of the financial asset in its entirety:
11.175
in the case of assets included in the "fair value through other comprehensive income"
category, any gain or loss previously recorded in equity is recycled to the statement of profit
and loss as per the requirements of the standards;
any new financial assets obtained, financial liabilities assumed and any servicing obligations
are recognised at fair value. new asset is part of the proceeds of sale. Any liability assumed,
even if it is related to the transferred asset, is a reduction of the sales proceeds.
the difference between the carrying amount and the consideration received is recognised in
the statement of comprehensive income.
Illustration 11: Assignment of receivables
ST Ltd. assigns its trade receivables to AT Ltd. The carrying amount of the receivables is
 10,00,000. The consideration received in exchange of this assignment is  9,00,000. Customers
have been instructed to deposit the amounts directly in a bank account for the benefit of AT Ltd.
AT Ltd. has no recourse to ST Ltd. in case of any shortfalls in collections.
State whether the derecognition principles will be applied or not.
Solution
In this situation, ST Ltd. has transferred the rights to contractual cash flows and has also transferred
substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership (credit risk being the most significant risk in this
situation).
Accordingly, ST Ltd. derecognises the financial asset and recognises 1,00,000, the difference
between consideration received and carrying amount, as an expense in the statement of profit or
loss.
*****
5.3.1.2 Transfers that do not qualify for derecognition
If a transfer does not result in derecognition because the entity has retained substantially all the
risks and rewards of ownership of the transferred asset (for example, in a situation when the
transferor guarantees transferee against any default losses), the entity shall,
continue to recognise the transferred asset in its entirety,
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.176
FINANCIAL REPORTING
recognise a financial liability for the consideration received, recognised at fair value less any
transaction costs incurred. The liability is subsequently measured at amortised cost using the
effective interest method, and
in subsequent periods, recognise any income on the transferred asset and any expense
incurred on the financial liability.
5.3.1.3 Continuing involvement in transferred assets (partial de-recognition)
If an entity neither transfers nor retains substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of a
transferred asset, and retains control of the transferred asset,
the entity continues to recognise the transferred asset to the extent of its continuing
involvement. The extent of the entity's continuing involvement in the transferred asset is the
extent to which it is exposed to changes in the value of the transferred asset.
Guarantees for transferred asset
The extent of the entity's continuing involvement is the lower of
(i)
(ii)
the amount of the asset, and
the maximum amount of the consideration received that the entity could be
required to repay ('the guarantee amount').
Illustration 12A: Debt factoring with recourse - continuing involvement asset
Entity C agrees with factoring company D to enter into a debt factoring arrangement. Under
the terms of the arrangement, the factoring company D agrees to pay 91.5 crores, less a
servicing charge of 1.5 crores (net proceeds of ₹90 crores), in exchange for 100% of the
cash flows from short-term receivables.
The receivables have a face value of 100 crores and carrying amount of 95 crores.
The customers will be instructed to pay the amounts owed into a bank account of the
factoring company. Entity C also writes a guarantee to the factoring company under which
it will reimburse any credit losses upto 5 crores, over and above the expected credit
losses of 5 crores. The guarantee is estimated to have a fair value of 0.5 crores.
Calculate the amount of continuing involvement asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.177
Solution
In this situation, the "continuing involvement asset" will be recognised at 5.5 crores i.e.
lower of:
(i)
the amount of the asset - 95 crores
(ii)
the guarantee amount - 5.5 crores
*****
the entity also recognises an associated liability that is measured in such a way that the
net carrying amount of the transferred asset and the associated liability is:
the amortised cost of the rights and obligations retained by the entity, if the transferred
asset is measured at amortised cost, or
equal to the fair value of the rights and obligations retained by the entity when
measured on a stand-alone basis, if the transferred asset is measured at fair value.
Recognised changes in the fair value of the transferred asset and the associated liability are
accounted for consistently with each other and shall not be offset.
If the transferred asset is measured at amortised cost, the option in this Standard to designate
a financial liability as at fair value through profit or loss is not applicable to the associated
liability.
In case of guarantees, as per the application guidance in Ind AS 109, the associated liability
is initially measured at
the guarantee amount plus
the fair value of the guarantee (which is normally the consideration received for the
guarantee).
Illustration 12B: Debt factoring with recourse - associated liability
Continuing illustration 12A, calculate the amount of associated liability.
Solution
The amount of associated liability is recognised at 5.5 crores, as below:
i. the guarantee amount (i.e. 5 crores) plus
ii. the fair value of the guarantee (i.e.  0.5 crores).
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.178
FINANCIAL REPORTING
If an entity's continuing involvement is in only a part of a financial asset, the entity allocates
the previous carrying amount of the financial asset between the part it continues to
recognise under continuing involvement, and the part it no longer recognises on the
basis of the relative fair values of those parts on the date of the transfer. The difference
between:
the carrying amount (measured at the date of derecognition) allocated to the part that
is no longer recognised and
the consideration received for the part no longer recognised
shall be recognised in profit or loss.
the entity shall continue to recognise any income arising on the transferred asset to the
extent of its continuing involvement and shall recognise any expense incurred on the
associated liability
Illustration 12C: Debt factoring with recourse - gain or loss on derecognition
Continuing illustration 12A and 12B, pass the necessary Journal Entry.
Solution
The journal entries passed by Entity C on the date of derecognition is as below:
Cash
Dr.
 90 crores
Loss on derecognition
Dr.
 5 crores
Continuing involvement asset
Dr.
 5.5 crores
To Receivables
 95 crores
To Associated liability
 5.5 crores
The guarantee liability of 0.5 crores shall be amortised in profit or loss over the underlying
period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.179
5.4 DERECOGNITION OF FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
5.4.1 General principles
5.4.1.1 Timing of derecognition
An entity shall remove a financial liability (or a part of a financial liability) from its balance sheet
when, and only when, it is extinguished-ie when the obligation specified in the contract is
discharged or cancelled or expires. (Paragraph 3.3.1 of Ind AS 109)
A financial liability (or part of it) is extinguished when the debtor either:
(a)
(b)
discharges the liability (or part of it) by paying the creditor, normally with cash, other financial
assets, goods or services; or
is legally released from primary responsibility for the liability (or part of it) either by process
of law or by the creditor. (If the debtor has given a guarantee this condition may still be met.)
(Paragraph B3.3.1 of Ind AS 109)
If a debtor pays a third party to assume an obligation and notifies its creditor that the third party has
assumed its debt obligation, the debtor does not derecognise the debt obligation unless the condition
in paragraph B3.3.1(b) is met. If the debtor pays a third party to assume an obligation and obtains
a legal release from its creditor, the debtor has extinguished the debt. However, if the debtor agrees
to make payments on the debt to the third party or direct to its original creditor, the debtor recognises
a new debt obligation to the third party. (Paragraph B3.3.4 of Ind AS 109)
Some entities operate, either internally or externally, an investment fund that provides
investors with benefits determined by units in the fund and recognise financial liabilities for
the amounts to be paid to those investors. Similarly, some entities issue groups of insurance
contracts with direct participation features and those entities hold the underlying items.
Some such funds or underlying items include the entity's financial liability (for example, a
corporate bond issued). Despite the other requirements in this Standard for the derecognition
of financial liabilities, an entity may elect not to derecognise its financial liability that is
included in such a fund or is an underlying item when, and only when, the entity repurchases
its financial liability for such purposes. Instead, the entity may elect to continue to account
for that instrument as a financial liability and to account for the repurchased instrument as if
the instrument were a financial asset and measure it at fair value through profit or loss in
accordance with this Standard. That election is irrevocable and made on an instrument-by-
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.180
FINANCIAL REPORTING
instrument basis. For the purposes of this election, insurance contracts include investment
contracts with discretionary participation features. (Paragraph 3.3.5 of Ind AS 109)
5.4.1.2 Accounting treatment for extinguishment
The difference between the carrying amount of a financial liability (or part of a financial liability)
extinguished or transferred to another party and the consideration paid, including any non-cash
assets transferred or liabilities assumed, shall be recognised in profit or loss. (Paragraph 3.3.3 of
Ind AS 109)
Further, in some cases, a creditor releases a debtor from its present obligation to make payments,
but the debtor assumes a guarantee obligation to pay if the party assuming primary responsibility
defaults. In these circumstances the debtor:
(a)
(b)
recognises a new financial liability based on the fair value of its obligation for the guarantee,
and
recognises a gain or loss based on the difference between (i) any proceeds paid and (ii) the
carrying amount of the original financial liability less the fair value of the new financial liability.
5.4.2 Exchange of financial liability instruments
Many times, entities re-negotiate terms of their existing debt with the lenders. In India, this is
popularly known as "Strategic Debt Restructuring" or SDR. Sometimes, entities approach their
lenders to renegotiate terms of their debt, when they want to take advantage of the falling interest
rate regime.
In accounting terms, such situations need to be evaluated to determine whether the original debt is
extinguished.
As per paragraph 3.3.2 of Ind AS 109, an exchange between an existing borrower and lender of debt
instruments with substantially different terms shall be accounted for as:
an extinguishment of the original financial liability, and
the recognition of a new financial liability.
Similarly, a substantial modification of the terms of an existing financial liability or a part of it
(whether or not attributable to the financial difficulty of the debtor) shall be accounted as mentioned
above.
As per application guidance in paragraph B3.3.6 of Ind AS 109, the terms are substantially
different if:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
(A)
(B)
11.181
Present value of:
•
cash flows under the new
terms,
• any fees paid
• net of any fees received
discounted using the original
effective interest rate
5.4.2.1 Accounting treatment
Discounted
present
LESS
value of the remaining
cash flows of the original
financial liability
Is greater
than or equal
to 10% of (B)
If an exchange of debt instruments or modification of terms is accounted for as an extinguishment,
any costs or fees incurred are recognised as part of the gain or loss on the extinguishment. In
determining those fees paid net of any fees received, a borrower includes only fees paid or received
between the borrower and the lender, including fees paid or received by either the borrower or lender
on the other's behalf.
If the exchange or modification is not accounted for as an extinguishment, any costs or fees incurred
adjust the carrying amount of the liability and are amortised over the remaining term of the modified
liability. It may be noted here that the costs or fees considered for this purpose differs from the costs
or fees considered for the purpose of 10% test. In the case where modification does not result in
derecognition, any costs or fees incurred is considered to adjust the effective interest rate whereas
for the 10% test only fees paid or received between the borrower and the lender, including fees paid
or received by either the borrower or lender on the other's behalf are considered.
Substantial modification of existing debt or replacement of existing
debt with new debt having substantially different terms
Yes - extinguishment
accounting
Costs or fees incurred are recognised as
part of the gain or loss on the
extinguishment
No - modification
accounting
Any costs or fees incurred adjust the
carrying amount of the liability and are
amortised over the remaining term of the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.182
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.
Extinguishment accounting
If the 10% test is passed, principle of "extinguishment accounting" are applied, that is:
de-recognition of the existing liability
recognition of the new or modified liability at its fair value (net of any fees incurred directly
related to the new liability)
recognition of a gain or loss equal to the difference between the carrying value of the old
liability and the fair value of the new one
recognising any incremental costs or fees incurred for modification (and not for the new
liability), and any consideration paid or received, in profit or loss
calculating a new effective interest rate for the modified liability, which is then used in future
periods.
Fair value of the new or modified liability is estimated based on the expected future cash flows of
the modified liability, discounted using the interest rate at which the entity could raise debt with
similar terms and conditions in the market.
Example 3: Extinguishment accounting
On 1 January 20X0, XYZ Ltd. issues 10 year bonds for 10,00,000, bearing interest at 10%
(payable annually on 31st December each year). The bonds are redeemable on 31 December
20X9 for 10,00,000. No costs or fees are incurred. The effective interest rate is therefore 10%.
On 1 January 20X5 (i.e. after 5 years) XYZ Ltd. and the bondholders agree to a modification in
accordance with which:
the term is extended to 31 December 20Y1;
interest payments are reduced to 5% p.a.;
the bonds are redeemable on 31 December 20Y1 for 15,00,000; and
legal and other fees of  1,00,000 are incurred.
XYZ Ltd. determines that the market interest rate on 1 January 20X5 for borrowings on similar
terms is 11%.
The repayment schedule for the original debt till the date of renegotiation is as below:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.183
On 1 January 20X5, the discounted present value of the remaining cash flows of the original
financial liability is  10,00,000.
On this date, XYZ Ltd. will compute the present value of:
cash flows under the new terms  i.e.  15,00,000 payable on 31 December 20Y1 and
 50,000 payable for each of the 7 years ending 31 December 20Y1.
fees paid by the borrower to the lender - i.e.  1,00,000 using the original effective interest
rate of 10%
The total of these amounts to 11,13,158 (Refer Working Note). This differs from the discounted
present value of the remaining cash flows of the original financial liability by 11.32% i.e. by more
than 10%. Hence, extinguishment accounting applies.
The next step is to estimate the fair value of the modified liability. This is determined as the
present value of the future cash flows (interest and principal), using an interest rate of 11% (the
market rate at which XYZ Ltd. could issue new bonds with similar terms). The estimated fair value
on this basis is 958,097 (Refer Working Note). A gain or loss on modification is then determined
as:
Gain (loss) = carrying value of existing liability - fair value of modified liability - fees and costs
incurred i.e.
10,00,000 - ₹9,58,097  ₹ 1,00,000 = Loss of  58,097
Working Note:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.184
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Modification accounting
Ind AS 109 is not clear as to the accounting treatment if the 10% test is failed. Two alternate
approaches are therefore possible:
Amortisation of any cost or fees incurred on modification
Under this approach,
the fees or costs incurred are netted against the existing liability;
the effective interest rate is recalculated. This is the rate which discounts the future cash
flows as per modified contractual terms to the adjusted carrying amount mentioned above
the adjusted effective interest rate is used to determine the amortised cost and interest
expense in future periods
Example 4: Modification accounting
On 1 January 20X0, XYZ Ltd. issues 10 year bonds for  1,000,000, bearing interest at 10%
(payable annually on 31st December each year). The bonds are redeemable on 31 December
20X9 for  1,000,000. No costs or fees are incurred. The effective interest rate is therefore 10%.
On 1 January 20X5 (i.e. after 5 years) XYZ Ltd. and the bondholders agree to a modification in
accordance with which:
no further interest payments are made
the bonds are redeemed on the original due date (31 December 20X9) for 1,600,000;
fees paid by the borrower to lender 50,000
.The repayment schedule for the original debt till the date of renegotiation is as below:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.185
On 1 January 20X5, the discounted present value of the remaining cash flows of the original
financial liability is 10,00,000.
On this date, XYZ Ltd. will compute the present value of:
i.
cash flows under the new terms  i.e.  16,00,000 payable on 31 December 20X9
ii. any fees paid (net of any fees received) – i.e. ₹50,000
using the original effective interest rate of 10%.
The total of these amounts to  10,43,474 (Refer Working Note). This differs from the discounted
present value of the remaining cash flows of the original financial liability by 4.35% i.e. by less
than 10%. Hence, modification accounting applies.
On this basis:
i.
the fees paid of ₹50,000 are netted against the existing liability of 10,00,000, resulting
in an adjusted carrying amount of  9,50,000;
ii.
iii.
the effective interest rate (EIR) is recalculated. This is the rate which discounts the future
cash flows (16,00,000 in five years' time) to the adjusted carrying amount of
9,50,000. The adjusted EIR is 10.99%
the adjusted EIR is used to determine the amortised cost and interest expense in future
periods.
Working Note:
For testing extinguishment -
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.186
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Accounting for revised cash flows @ original EIR
Illustration 13: Renegotiation of terms of (defaulted) borrowings subsequent to the year-
end
Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments requires recognition of renegotiation gain/loss subject to
fulfillment of certain conditions as mentioned in the standard. If there has been a renegotiation of
terms of (defaulted) borrowings subsequent to the year end, but before the date of approval of
financial statements, then should such modification gain/loss be recognised in the current year
financial statements itself or in the next year when the terms of (defaulted) borrowings have been
renegotiated in accordance with Ind AS 109?
Solution
As per paragraph 5.4.3 of Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments, whenever contractual cash flows of a
financial instrument are renegotiated or otherwise modified and the renegotiation or modification
does not result in the derecognition of that financial asset in accordance with this Standard, an entity
shall recalculate the gross carrying amount of the financial asset and shall recognise a modification
gain or loss in profit or loss.
In accordance with the above, modification gain or loss should be recognised in profit or loss in the
period in which the renegotiation has contractually taken place. Accordingly, in the given case, if
the terms of the (defaulted) borrowings have been renegotiated in the next year, then the related
gain/loss should also be recognised in the next year.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
5.4.3 Debt for equity swaps
11.187
A debtor and creditor might renegotiate the terms of a financial liability with the result that the debtor
extinguishes the liability fully or partially by issuing equity instruments to the creditor. These
transactions are sometimes referred to as 'debt for equity swaps'.
Appendix D to Ind AS 109, "Extinguishing Financial Liabilities with Equity Instruments" deals with
accounting for such situations.
It must be noted that these accounting principles do not apply in following situations:
the creditor is also a direct or indirect shareholder and is acting in its capacity as a direct or
indirect existing shareholder
the creditor and the entity are controlled by the same party or parties before and after the
transaction and the substance of the transaction includes an equity distribution by, or
contribution to, the entity
extinguishing the financial liability by issuing equity shares is in accordance with the original
terms of the financial liability
The accounting principles are summarised below:
An entity shall remove a financial liability (or part of a financial liability) from its balance
sheet when, and only when, it is extinguished in accordance with derecognition principles
mentioned above
When equity instruments issued to a creditor to extinguish all or part of a financial liability
are recognised initially, an entity shall measure them at the fair value of the equity
instruments issued, unless that fair value cannot be reliably measured.
If the fair value of the equity instruments issued cannot be reliably measured then the
equity instruments shall be measured to reflect the fair value of the financial liability
extinguished.
If only part of the financial liability is extinguished, the entity shall assess whether some
of the consideration paid relates to a modification of the terms of the liability that remains
outstanding. If part of the consideration paid does relate to a modification of the terms of
the remaining part of the liability, the entity shall allocate the consideration paid between the
part of the liability extinguished and the part of the liability that remains outstanding.
The consideration allocated to the remaining liability shall form part of the assessment of
whether the terms of that remaining liability have been substantially modified. If the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.188
FINANCIAL REPORTING
remaining liability has been substantially modified, the entity shall account for the
modification as the extinguishment of the original liability and the recognition of a new
liability.
The difference between the carrying amount of the financial liability (or part of a financial
liability) extinguished, and the consideration paid, shall be recognised in profit or loss.
Example 5: Extinguishment of part of a financial liability through issue of equity
instruments
JK Ltd. has an outstanding unsecured loan of 90 crores to a bank. The effective interest rate (EIR)
of this loan is 10%. Owing to financial difficulties, JK Ltd. is unable to service the debt and
approaches the bank for a settlement.
The bank offers the following terms which are accepted by JK Ltd.:
$2/3^{rd}$ of the debt is unsustainable and hence will be converted into 70% equity interest in
JK Ltd. The fair value of net assets of JK Ltd. is  80 crores.
$1/3^{rd}$ of the debt is sustainable and the bank agrees to certain moratorium period and
decrease in interest rate in initial periods. The present value of cash flows as per these
revised terms calculated using original EIR is 25 crores. The fair value of the cash flows
as per these revised terms is
28 crores.
Fair value of the consideration paid is 56 crores (70% of 80 crores) plus 28 crores i.e.  84
crores.
Accordingly, $2/3^{rd}$ of the original financial liability is extinguished through issue of equity shares
and terms of $1/3^{rd}$ of the original financial liability have been modified. JK Ltd. will need to evaluate
if this modification tantamount to "substantial modification" or not.
Applying the guidance contained in Appendix D to Ind AS 109:
Difference between the fair value of equity instruments (56 crores) and $2/3rd$ of the
original financial liability $(2/3rd$ of ₹90 crores =  60 crores) i.e.  4 crores will be
recognised as a gain in the statement of profit and loss
Carrying amount of original financial liability which is not extinguished (1/3rd of 90 crores
$=\mp30$ crores) is compared with the present value of cash flows as per these revised terms
( 25 crores)
As the difference is more than 10%, this results in substantial modification of the original
financial liability. Resultantly, the existing financial liability (30 crores) will be extinguished
and the new financial liability will be recognised at its fair value i.e.  28 crores.
The difference i.e. 2 crores will be recognised as a gain in the statement of profit and
loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
