INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.83
UNIT 3:
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113: FAIR
VALUE MEASUREMENT
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
Understand the need for issuance of Ind AS 113
Define fair value
Appreciate the scope and objective of this standard
Apply the provisions of the standard on ‘non-financial assets , ‘liabilities' and
an entity's 'own equity instruments'
Measure fair value at  initial recognition'
Use valuation techniques prescribed in the standard
☐ Classify the fair value hierarchy under various level
☐
Disclose the information as per the requirements of the standards
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.84
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT OVERVIEW
Ind AS 113
Determine whether the item is in Scope of Ind AS 113
See Below
Identify the Item being
Measured
Establish Parameters
Identify the Unit of Account
and Unit of Valuation
Identify the Market Partcipants
and identify the market
Level I
Select appropriate Valuation approaches and techniques
Market Approach
Income Approach
Determine Inputs to Value Fair Value
Level II
Cost Approach
Level III
Measure Fair Value
Fair Value at Initial
Recognition
Highest and
Best Use
Liabilities and
Own Equity
Instruments
Portfolio
Measurements
Exceptions
Inactive
Markets
Disclose Information about Fair Value Measurements
3.1 WHAT IS FAIR VALUE?
?
Normally assets and liabilities are being exchanged between parties at their
agreed terms and conditions based on the prices which might be related to
the entity or event based or in other words which is not at arm's length prices.
To define fair value one has to ensure that the values reflect all assumptions/
adjustments to change from transaction specific/ entity specific to normal transaction which is
common for all interested parties.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.85
In other words, it is a market-based measurement not an entity specific measurement and this
price should be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in a normal transaction (e.g.
other than any stressed sale etc). Fair value is an exit price and not a price at which an asset/
liability sells / purchase otherwise.
3.2 OBJECTIVE
☐
☐
☐
Defines fair value
Sets out in a single Ind AS a framework for measuring fair value; and
Requires disclosures about fair value measurements
Fair value is a market-based measurement, not an entity-specific measurement.
The objective of a fair value measurement is-
• To estimate the price
•
At which an orderly transaction to sell the asset or to transfer the liability would take place
•
Between market participants
•
At the measurement date
• Under current market conditions
(i.e. an exit price at the measurement date from the perspective of a market participant that holds
the asset or owes the liability).
When a price for an identical asset or liability is not observable, an entity measures fair value
using another valuation technique that:
• Maximises the use of relevant observable inputs and
•
Minimises the use of unobservable inputs.
Because fair value is a market-based measurement, it is measured using the assumptions that
market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions about
risk. As a result, an entity's intention to hold an asset or to settle or otherwise fulfil a liability is
not relevant when measuring fair value.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.86
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The definition of fair value focuses on assets and liabilities because they are a primary subject
of accounting measurement. In addition, this Ind AS shall be applied to an entity's own equity
instruments measured at fair value.
3.3 SCOPE
There are many Ind AS which require measuring assets / liabilities at fair value
and whenever it is required to be fair valued, one looks at Ind AS 113. It
means that this Standard will cover all such requirements of another standard
where fair value measurement and disclosure is needed. However, there are
some specific scope exclusions. It applies to initial measurement and
subsequent measurement as required by respective Accounting Standard.
Objective and Scope of Ind AS 113
Objective and Scope of Ind AS 113
Scope
objective (Para 1)
to
define
Fair
Value
set out in a
single Ind
AS
Framework
for
require
Disclosures
measuring
Fair Value
Applicability
When another Ind AS
requires/permits
fair
value measurement
(and measurements,
such as FVLCTS,
based on fair value or
disclosures about
those measurements)
e.g.
WHEN Ind AS 109
HOW Ind AS 113
Non-applicability
Measurement and
Disclosure
SBP - Ind AS 102
Leases - Ind AS 116
Measurement similar
to Fair Value but not
Fair Value e.g. NRV
in Ind AS 2 or value
in use in Ind AS 36
Disclosures of
Ind AS 113
Plan Assets at
FV-Ind AS 19
Assets for
which
recoverable
amout is FV
less costs of
disposal - Ind
AS 36
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.87
Example of items covered under Ind AS 113
• Fair value less cost to sell as required under Ind AS 105 for assets held for sale.
• Fair value through Profit and Loss or through Other Comprehensive Income as required
•
under Ind AS 109 for Financial Instruments.
Property, plant & equipment measured using revaluation modal as required under
Ind AS 16.
• Biological assets measure at fair value under Ind AS 41 for biological assets.
3.3.1 What is not covered?
Standard specifically describes the below exceptions which are not covered by this Accounting
Standard and hence one has to look at the respective standards to identify the process to calculate
fair values of the items of that standard. The scope exclusion will be applied on below:
3.3.1.1 Measurement and Disclosure exclusion
(a)
(b)
(c)
share-based payment transactions within the scope of Ind AS 102, Share based Payment;
leasing transactions accounted in accordance with Ind AS 116, Leases; and
measurements that have some similarities to fair value but are not fair value, such as net
realisable value in Ind AS 2, Inventories, or value in use in Ind AS 36, Impairment of Assets.
3.3.1.2 Disclosure exclusion
(a)
(b)
plan assets measured at fair value in accordance with Ind AS 19, Employee Benefits;
assets for which recoverable amount is fair value less costs of disposal in accordance with
Ind AS 36.
3.4 DEFINITION
This Ind AS defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to
transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement
date.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.88
FINANCIAL REPORTING
In order to understand the definition of the fair value, some of the major terms as used in the
definition need to be understood which are as follows:
a. The asset or liability
b.
The transaction
C.
Market participants
d. The price
Example 1 - Settlement vs Transfer
A bank holds a debt obligation with a face value of  1,00,000 and a market value of 95,000.
Assume that market interest rates are consistent with the amount in the note; however, there is
5,000 discount due to market concerns about the risk of non-performance by Counterparty I.
Settlement value
Counterparty I would be required to pay the face value of the note to settle the obligation, because
the bank might not be willing to discount the note by the market discount or the credit risk
adjustment. Therefore, the settlement value would equal the face value of the note.
Transfer value
In order to calculate the transfer value, Counterparty I must construct a hypothetical transaction
in which another counterparty (Counterparty II), with a similar credit profile, is seeking financing
on terms that are substantially the same as the note. Counterparty II could choose to enter into
a new note agreement with the bank or receive the existing note from Counterparty I in a transfer
transaction. In this hypothetical transaction, Counterparty II should be equally willing to obtain
financing through a new bank note or assumption of the existing note in return for a payment of
95,000. Therefore, the transfer value would be 95,000, and thus the fair value.
3.5 ASSET OR LIABILITY SPECIFIC FAIR VALUE
Ind AS 113 states that a fair value measurement takes into account the characteristics of the asset
or liability, e.g. the condition and location of the asset and restrictions, if any, on its sale or use.
The restriction or the condition relating to asset which can affect the future economic benefit from
the asset need to be considered in determining the fair value of the asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.89
The standard emphasis that in order to get a fair value of an asset/ liability, the restrictions or
conditions that might be related to a particular entity should not be taken into account because a
fair value will be based on market participant assumptions rather to an entity specific conditions
or restriction which usually will not affect fair valuation of an asset/ liability.
The restrictions could be entity specific or an asset/ liability specific hence all such restrictions
which are asset/liability specific & being transfer to the buyer as it is, then these will be considered
while calculating fair value. In contrast, if the restrictions are entity specific then it will not be
considered.
Example 2: Entity Specific restrictions
An entity is having a land which has a restriction to develop into a commercial house because of
restricted business objective in which currently the entity operates. The entity wants to sell the
land and there would not be any restriction for a buyer of the land to develop a commercial house,
since this restriction is entity specific. Hence, it will not be considered while calculating fair value
of the land.
Example 3: Asset / Liability specific restrictions
A car has been bought for private use and there is a restriction of not to use the car for any
commercial purposes. Commercial vehicle is having more fair value than private vehicle. since
the restriction to use the vehicle is asset specific and market participant will also consider the
asset specific restrictions while calculating fair values for such asset, hence this condition will be
considered while evaluating fair value of the car.
3.6 UNIT OF ACCOUNT
An Asset or a Liability Is
aggregated or disaggregated
For Recognition
Unit of Account
An Asset or a Liability Is
aggregated or disaggregated
For
Measurement
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.90
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Ind AS 113 describes how to measure fair value, not what is being measured at fair value. Other
Ind AS specify whether a fair value measurement considers an individual asset or liability or a
group of assets or liabilities (i.e. the unit of account).
Whether the asset or liability is a stand-alone asset or liability, a group of assets, a group of
liabilities or a group of assets and liabilities for recognition or disclosure purposes depends on its
unit of account.
The unit of account for the asset or liability shall be determined in accordance with the Ind AS that
requires or permits the fair value measurement, except as provided in this Ind AS.
This essentially defines the level of aggregation or disaggregation while calculating fair values of
the assets/ liabilities.
Examples 5 & 6
5.
6.
An entity having certain securities which are quoted at market and these are recognized at
fair value in the balance sheet. Quoted prices at individual level will be used in order to
find fair values of these investments.
In order to evaluate fair value of assets to identify impairment as per Ind AS 36, which
requires to measure such fair value at CGU (cash generating unit) level, group of assets
will be used to find fair values as per the requirement of such standard.
3.7 THE TRANSACTION
A fair value measurement assumes that the asset or liability is exchanged in an orderly transaction
between market participants to sell the asset or transfer the liability at the measurement date
under current market conditions.
A fair value measurement assumes that the transaction to sell the asset or transfer the liability
takes place either:
(a) in the principal market for the asset or liability; or
(b)
in the absence of a principal market, in the most advantageous market for the asset or liability.
There could be different principal markets for different reporting entities even if they belong to the
same group. The principal market / most advantageous market would separately be evaluated for
different assets / liabilities under the fair valuation requirements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.91
3.7.1 Principal market
Market which is normally the place in which the assets / liabilities are being transacted with highest
volume and with high level of activities comparing with any other market available for similar
transactions.
If there is principal market, the price in the market must be used even if the prices in the other
market are more advantageous.
Because the principal market is the most liquid market for the asset or liability, that market will
provide the most representative input for a fair value measurement.
Example 7
Shares of a company which is listed at BSE and NYSE have different closing prices at the year
end. The price at BSE has greatest volume and activity whereas at NYSE it is less in terms of
volume transacted in the period. Since BSE has got highest volume and significant level of activity
comparing to other market although the closing price is higher at NYSE, the closing price at BSE
would be taken.
3.7.2 Most advantageous market
• This is the market which either maximizes the amount that would be received when an
entity sells an asset or minimize the amount that is to be paid while transferring the liability.
In the absence of a principal market, this market is used for fair valuation of the assets /
liabilities. In many cases Principal Market & Most Advantageous Market will be same.
•
•
The market will be assessed based on net proceeds from the sale after deducting expenses
associated with such sale in the most advantageous market.
Example 8
Diamond (a commodity) has got a domestic market where the prices are less compared to the
price available for export of similar diamonds. The Government has a policy to cap the export of
Diamond, maximum upto 10% of total output by any such manufacturer. The normal activities of
diamond are being done in the domestic market only i.e. 90% and balance 10% only can be sold
via export. The highest level of activities with the highest volume is being done in the domestic
market. Hence, the principal market for diamond would be the domestic market. Export prices
are more than the prices in the principal market, and it would give the highest return as compared
to the domestic market. Therefore, the export market would be considered as the most
advantageous market. However, if principal market is available, then its prices would be used for
fair valuation of assets/ liabilities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.92
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.8 MARKET PARTICIPANTS
A fair value measurement is a market-based measurement, not an entity-specific measurement.
Therefore, a fair value measurement uses the assumptions that market participants would use
when pricing the asset or liability.
An entity shall measure the fair value of an asset or a liability using the assumptions that market
participants would use when pricing the asset or liability, assuming that market participants act in
their economic best interest.
3.8.1 What are market participants?
The parties which eventually transact the assets/ liabilities either in principal market or the most
advantageous market in their best economic interest i.e.
• They should be independent and not related parties. However, if related parties have done
similar transaction on arm's length price, then it can be between related parties as well.
• The parties should not be under any stress or force to enter into these transactions
• All parties should have reasonable and sufficient information about the same.
Example 9
A land has legal restriction to use it for commercial purposes in next 10 years irrespective of its
holder. The fair value of the land will include this restriction about its usage because it is an asset
related restriction and any buyer will need to take over with similar restriction to use the land for
next 10 years. Now to evaluate its fair value, one has to consider the restriction based on the
assumptions which normally would be taking into account by its market participants, mentioned
as below
a)
b)
Whether the restriction is commonly imposed on each such type of land?
How useful it will be after the end of 10 years?
c)
Whether there is any alternative use which may be considered normally by a participant for
similar kind of deals?
d)
How liquid the sale of land will be with such restrictions?
e)
Comparing the price with similar kind of land without restrictions to arrive at its fair values.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.93
3.9 THE PRICE
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction in the principal (or most advantageous) market at the measurement date under
current market conditions (i.e. an exit price) regardless of whether that price is directly observable
or estimated using another valuation technique.
A fair value is being assessed based on principal market and if principal market is not available
then based on the most advantageous market.
Illustration 1
A Ltd. has invested in certain bonds. The fair value of these bonds in different markets to which
A Ltd. has an access is as follows:
(i)
Principal market 500
(ii)
Highest and best use ₹600
(iii)
Net present value of expected cash flows 550
(iv) Asset based valuation approach  450
What will be the fair value of bond as per Ind AS 113?
Solution
As per para 24 of Ind AS 113, fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid
to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the principal (or most advantageous) market at
the measurement date under current market conditions (i.e. an exit price) regardless of whether
that price is directly observable or estimated using another valuation technique.
Further, para 72 of the standard inter alia states that the fair value hierarchy gives the highest
priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1
inputs) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs).
According to the above, the value of bond shall be 500 based on the principal market.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.94
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.9.1 Transaction cost
The transaction costs are not a characteristic of an asset or a liability, but a characteristic of the
transaction.
Hence, it would not be appropriate to consider any transaction cost further while assessing fair values
from such principal markets.
Note: Transaction costs do not include transport costs.
3.9.2 Transport cost
Transport costs are different from transaction costs. It is the cost that would be incurred to
transport the asset from its current location to its principal (or most advantageous) market. Unlike
transaction costs, which arise from a transaction and do not change the characteristics of the
asset or liability, transport costs arise from an event (transport) that does change a characteristic
of an asset (its location).
If location is a characteristic of the asset (as might be the case, for example, for a commodity),
the price in the principal (or most advantageous) market shall be adjusted for the costs, if any,
that would be incurred to transport the asset from its current location to that market.
It would be considered, if in case it is an inherent part of the Assets/ Liability so transacted e.g.
commodity.
Example 10
An entity sells certain commodity which are available actively at location A and which is considered
to be its principal market (being significant volume of transactions and activities takes place).
However, fair value of the commodity is required to be assessed for location B which is far from
location A and requires a transport cost of ₹100. Since the transport cost is not a transaction
cost and it is not specific to any transaction but it is inherent cost which required to be incurred
while bringing such commodity from location A to location B, it will be considered while evaluating
fair value from the principal market.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.95
Price in a different
market is potentially
favourable
Access on
measurement date
Need not be able to sell
on the measurement
date
No exhaustive list of
possible markets
required
Fair value
measurement
Assumes that
transaction takes
place at that date
3.10 APPLYING FAIR VALUE RULES ON NON-FINANCIAL
ASSETS
The financial assets do not have alternative uses because they have specific contractual terms
and can have a different use only if the characteristics of the financial assets (ie the contractual
terms) are changed.
Fair valuation in case of non-financial assets especially buildings and other property, plant and
equipment often require to look for the best and highest use by its market participants and that
will be the reference point to evaluate fair value of such non-financial assets.
3.10.1 Highest and best use
The highest and best use is a valuation concept used to value many non-financial assets (eg real
estate). The highest and best use of a non-financial asset must be physically possible, legally
permissible and financially feasible.
A fair value measurement of a non-financial asset takes into account a market participant's ability
to generate economic benefits by using the asset in its highest and best use or by selling it to
another market participant that would use the asset in its highest and best use.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.96
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The highest and the best use is determined from market participant perspective. It does not matter
whether the entity intends to use the asset differently.
Analysis of Highest and best use for non-financial asset
•
• The highest and best use would determine an indicative price for a non-financial asset
which usually do not have any frequently traded market unlike for other financial products.
The concept emphasis that in order to find a fair value of such non-financial products, one
has to define its best possible use which makes the non-financial asset separate from any
specific entity who would like to use such asset in their own specific purposes which may
or may not be its best use.
•
•
•
•
To find out the best possible use, one has to identify its market participants and then to find
best legitimate use of this non- financial asset which one would normally do.
All restrictions specific to any market participant would not be considered while finding out
fair value of the non-financial asset.
It is imperative to understand the best use while evaluating such fair values, as there is no
need to exhaust all possible uses of such non-financial assets before concluding highest
and best use.
In the absence of potential best use which is not easily available, its current use would be
considered as best use.
Examples 11, 12 & 13
11. An entity bought some land which is intended to be used for business purposes. However,
the entity now wants to sell this piece of land at its fair value. One has to evaluate all
possible uses of this land before determining its fair value. The land could be used to make
a commercial place, which could be more in value as compared to when it is used for
business purposes. The commercial place value would be considered its highest and best
use if the same is allowed in its near locations and condition.
12. Current use as Highest and Best Use
A Ltd acquires a machine in a business combination by acquiring controlling stake in B Ltd.
The machine will be held and used in A's operations. The machine was originally
purchased by B Ltd from an outside vendor and, before the business combination, was
customized by B Ltd for use in its operations. However, the customization of the machine
was not extensive.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.97
A Ltd determines that the asset would provide maximum value to market participants
through its use in combination with other assets or with other assets and liabilities (as
installed or otherwise configured for use). There is no evidence to suggest that the current
use of the machine is not its highest and best use. Therefore, the highest and best use of
the machine is its current use in combination with other assets or with other assets and
liabilities.
13. Potential use as Highest and Best Use
A Ltd owns a property, which comprises land with an old warehouse on it. It has been
determined that the land could be redeveloped into a leisure park. The land's market value
would be higher if redeveloped than the market value under its current use. A Ltd is unclear
about whether the investment property's fair value should be based on the market value of
the property (land and warehouse) under its current use, or the land's potential market
value if the leisure park redevelopment occurred.
The property's fair value should be based on the land's market value for its potential use.
The 'highest and best use' is the most appropriate model for fair value. Under this approach,
the property's existing-use value is not the only basis considered. Fair value is the highest
value, determined from market evidence, by considering any other use that is physically
possible, legally permissible and financially feasible.
The highest and best use valuation assumes the site's redevelopment. This will involve
demolishing the current warehouse and constructing a leisure park in its place. Therefore,
none of the market value obtained for the land should be allocated to the building. So, the
market value of the current building on the property's highest and best use (as a
warehouse), is Nil. As a result, the building's current carrying amount should be written
down to zero.
3.10.2 Valuation premise
Fair value measurement of non-financial assets would be based on either
1)
In combination with other assets, or
2) At standalone basis,
Standard requires to use best used value if such non-financial asset is used in combination with
some other assets and it is demonstrated that the such combination is widely used by other market
participants also in order to find best use for the non-financial asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.98
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 14
To find the fair value of customer relations where a right to receive all future technological updates/
researches is being provided as complementary (which is in a way another intangible asset) i.e.
other than customer relations. The customer relations would be valued together with the right to
receive all the future technological updates / researches, as it is likely to have less or no value for
the customer relations without considering such right to receive all future technological updates/
researches which is being provided free to them.
Physically Possible
Yes
Legally Permissible
Yes
Financially Feasible
Yes
No
Maximises Value
Use is not considered in
Measuring Fair Value
No
Use is not
considered in
Measuring Fair
Value
No
Use is not
considered in
Measuring Fair
Value
Yes
Use is
No
Use is not considered
considred in
Measuring Fair
in Measuring Fair
Value
Value
3.11 APPLYING FAIR VALUE RULES TO LIABILITIES AND AN
ENTITY'S OWN EQUITY INSTRUMENTS
A fair value measurement assumes that a financial or non-financial liability or an entity's own
equity instrument (eg equity interests issued as consideration in a business combination) is
transferred to a market participant at the measurement date.
Many a times a liability or an equity instrument of an entity is being transferred to some other
market participant as part of a transaction e.g. a business combination, where certain liabilities or
equity instruments are being issued in consideration of such acquisitions.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.99
The standard specifies an assumption that liabilities and /or equity instruments so transferred will
remain outstanding on the date of measurement. Standard prescribes to use all observable inputs
(if direct quoted prices are not available) and should minimize any un-observable inputs. The
transaction considered to find fair value should be evaluated in line with an orderly transaction
(not an entity specific).
The standard specifically provides guidance on the respective scenarios while evaluating fair
values of the liabilities and own equity instruments in case direct quoted prices are not available.
Observable Inputs: Inputs that are developed using market data, such as publicly available
information about actual events or transactions, and that reflect the assumptions that market
participants would use when pricing the asset or liability.
Unobservable Inputs: Inputs for which market data are not available and that are developed
using the best information available about the assumptions that market participants would use
when pricing the asset or liability.
3.11.1 When liability and equity instruments are held by other parties as
assets
When directly quoted prices are not available for liabilities or equity instruments, then an entity
should use an identical price of similar liabilities or equity instruments which is held by market
participants as an asset. The quoted prices of such assets at the measurement date should be
used. However, if quoted prices are not available then observable inputs can be used. In the
absence of observable inputs, the valuation techniques such as income approach or market
approach etc. may be used.
3.11.2 When liability and equity instruments are not held by other parties
as assets
When these are not held by other parties then valuation techniques from the perspective of a
market participant that owes the liability or has issued the claim on equity would be used to
evaluate such fair values.
If (A) or (B) are not
Fair value of liability or equity instrument
Using quoted price in
active market (A)
Other observable
inputs (B)
Income approach
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
available
Market approach
4.100
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.12 APPLYING FAIR VALUE RULES TO FINANCIAL ASSET &
FINANCIAL LIABILITY WITH OFFSETTING POSITION IN
MARKET RISK OR COUNTERPARTY RISK
Assets and liabilities that are being managed by an entity would be affected by its market risk i.e.
interest rate risk, currency risk etc. and credit risk relating to its respective counterparties.
There are many situations where a group of assets and liabilities are being managed on net basis
rather than individual basis by an entity.
For example, certain contracts of derivatives which are being netted with all existing open
positions from same counterparty etc.
If the entity manages that group of financial assets and financial liabilities on the basis of its net
exposure to either market risks or credit risk, the entity is permitted to apply an exception to this
Ind AS for measuring fair value.
That exception permits an entity to measure the fair value of a group of financial assets and
financial liabilities on the basis of the price that would be received to sell a net long position (ie
an asset) for a particular risk exposure or paid to transfer a net short position (ie a liability) for a
particular risk exposure in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement
date under current market conditions. Accordingly, an entity shall measure the fair value of the
group of financial assets and financial liabilities consistently with how market participants would
price the net risk exposure at the measurement date.
Analysis of applying offsetting position in market or credit risk
• This exception is allowed only in case the other market participants also manage the similar
risk on net basis.
•
There should ideally be same information and market practice available for making these
assets/ liabilities on net basis.
All open position for derivatives are being normally evaluated on net exposure basis from
each counterparty.
• Once the exception to fair value certain assets/ liabilities on net basis is being used, then
unit of account to measure fair value would be considered as net.
• Market risk should be same while combining any asset/ liability.
An interest rate risk can not be netted with a commodity price risk.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
•
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.101
Duration of a market risk should be identical to use the exception for valuing assets/
liabilities on net basis.
1.
2.
An interest rate swap of longer period will only be allowed to value at net basis upto
the duration of financial instrument of the same duration.
Certain Interest rate risk from counterparty Z is being managed on net basis
considering the changes in interest rate amount receivable and amounts payable to
counterparty Z from normal sale/ purchase basis. Hence such net exposure would
be used to evaluate fair values as required by this standard. The netting should
normally be followed by other market participants as well and should not be an entity
specific.
3.13 FAIR VALUE AT INITIAL RECOGNITION
When an asset is acquired or a liability is assumed in an exchange
transaction for that asset or liability, the transaction price is the price paid
to acquire the asset or received to assume the liability (an entry price).
In contrast, the fair value of the asset or liability is the price that would be
received to sell the asset or paid to transfer the liability (an exit price).
Entities do not necessarily sell assets at the prices paid to acquire them. Similarly, entities do not
necessarily transfer liabilities at the prices received to assume them.
In many cases the transaction price will equal the fair value (eg that might be the case when on
the transaction date the transaction to buy an asset takes place in the market in which the asset
would be sold).
When determining whether fair value at initial recognition equals the transaction price, an entity
shall take into account factors specific to the transaction and to the asset or liability. For example,
the transaction price might not represent the fair value of an asset or a liability at initial recognition
if any of the following conditions exist:
(a)
The transaction is between related parties, although the price in a related party transaction
may be used as an input into a fair value measurement if the entity has evidence that the
transaction was entered into at market terms.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.102
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
(d)
The transaction takes place under duress or the seller is forced to accept the price in the
transaction. For example, that might be the case if the seller is experiencing financial
difficulty.
The unit of account represented by the transaction price is different from the unit of account
for the asset or liability measured at fair value. For example, that might be the case if the
asset or liability measured at fair value is only one of the elements in the transaction (eg in a
business combination), the transaction includes unstated rights and privileges that are
measured separately in accordance with another Ind AS, or the transaction price includes
transaction costs.
The market in which the transaction takes place is different from the principal market (or most
advantageous market). For example, those markets might be different if the entity is a dealer
that enters into transactions with customers in the retail market, but the principal (or most
advantageous) market for the exit transaction is with other dealers in the dealer market.
If another Ind AS requires or permits an entity to measure an asset or a liability initially at fair
value and the transaction price differs from fair value, the entity shall recognise the resulting gain
or loss in profit or loss unless that Ind AS specifies otherwise.
3.14 VALUATION TECHNIQUES
When measuring fair value, the objective of using a valuation technique is to estimate the price at
which an orderly transaction would take place between market participants at the measurement
date under current market conditions.
An entity shall use valuation techniques that are appropriate in the circumstances and for which
sufficient data are available to measure fair value, maximizing the use of relevant observable
inputs and minimizing the use of unobservable inputs.
It is pertinent to note that the overall objective to use any valuation approach or technique is in
accordance with all relevant data available related to the Asset/ liability which could utilize all
directly observable inputs.
Note: It is worth to be noted that in case of availability of quoted prices which are being used in
an active market, there is no need to consider any valuation approach further.
The standard requires and allows using one or combination of more than one approach to measure
any fair value which corroborates all inputs available related to such asset/ liability. Selecting an
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.103
appropriate approach is matter of judgment and based on the available inputs related to the asset
/ liability.
Example 15
An unquoted investment can be fair valued either by taking similar entity's quoted prices with
appropriate adjustments or a valuation of business using DCF or some other technique. This
would purely be dependent upon the available inputs and approach relevant for the asset/ liability.
Valuation Techniques
Appropriate in the
circumstances
And
For which sufficient
data are available to
measure Fair value
Maximising the use of
relevant observable
inputs
Minimising the use of
unobservable inputs
Ind AS 113 specifies following three approaches to measure fair values:
Market Approach
Cost Approach
Valuation Techniques
Income Approach
1.
MARKET APPROACH: The market approach uses prices and other relevant information
generated by market transactions involving identical or comparable (i.e. similar) assets, liabilities
or a group of assets and liabilities, such as a business.
For example, valuation techniques consistent with the market approach often use market multiples
derived from a set of comparables. Multiples might be in ranges with a different multiple for each
comparable. The selection of the appropriate multiple within the range requires judgement,
considering qualitative and quantitative factors specific to the measurement.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.104
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Quoted prices are indicative values of any business if it exchanges in an active market. However,
in the absence of such quoted prices, it is relevant to value the business based on market values
and do some adjustment relevant to the assets/ liabilities. Standard specifies a valuation
technique called "Matrix pricing" which is normally used to value debt securities. This technique
relates the securities with some similar benchmarked securities including coupons, credit ratings
etc. to derive at fair value of the debt.
An entity does not have any security which is quoted in an active market, however, its price to
earnings ratio is being used to corroborate its enterprise value with certain adjustments relevant
to the business e.g. there are some specific restrictions to use certain assets for some specific
period being in a specialized industry.
2. INCOME APPROACH: The income approach converts future amounts (e.g. cash flows or
income and expenses) to a single current (i.e. discounted) amount. When the income approach
is used, the fair value measurement reflects current market expectations about those future
amounts.
It is a present value of all future earnings from an entity whose fair values are being evaluated or
in other words all future cash flows to be discounted at current date to get fair value of the asset
/ liability.
Assumption to the future cash flows and an appropriate discount rate would be based on the other
market participant's views. Related risks and uncertainty would require to be considered and
would be taken into either in cash flow or discount rate.
Illustration 2
Discount Rate assessment to measure present value:
Investment 1 is a contractual right to receive  800 in 1 year. There is an established market for
comparable assets, and information about those assets, including price information, is available.
Of those comparable assets:
a. Investment 2 is a contractual right to receive 1,200 in 1 year and has a market price of
1,083.
b.
Investment 3 is a contractual right to receive 700 in 2 years and has a market price of
566.
All three assets are comparable with respect to risk (that is, dispersion of possible payoffs and credit).
You are required to measure the fair value of Asset 1 basis above information.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.105
Solution
On the basis of the timing of the contractual payments to be received for Investment 1 relative to
the timing for Investment 2 and Investment 3 (that is, one year for Investment 2 versus two years
for Investment 3), Investment 2 is deemed more comparable to Investment 1. Using the
contractual payment to be received for Investment 1 (800) and the 1-year market rate derived
from Investment 2, the fair value of Investment 1 is calculated as under:
Value of Investment 1
$=\mathbb{Z}800/1.108=\mathbb{Z}722$
Alternatively, in the absence of available market information for Investment 2, the one-year market
rate could be derived from Investment 3 using the build-up approach. In that case, the 2-year
market rate indicated by Investment 3 would be adjusted to a 1-year market rate using the term
structure of the risk-free yield curve. Additional information and analysis might be required to
determine whether the risk premiums for one-year and two-year assets are the same. If it is
determined that the risk premiums for one-year and two-year assets are not the same, the two-
year market rate of return would be further adjusted for that effect.
*****
Standard defines the below techniques which may be considered while using Income approach
a) Present value techniques
b) Option pricing modals e.g. Black-Scholes Merton modal or Binomial modal
c) The multi period excess earning method.
Example 16
An entity has estimated its next year's earnings (cash flows) based on certain probability as
mentioned below:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.106
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3. COST APPROACH: This method describes how much cost is required to replace existing
asset/ liability in order to make it in a working condition. All related costs will be its fair value. It
actually considers replacement cost of the asset/ liability for which we need to find fair value.
3.15 INPUTS TO VALUATION TECHNIQUES
Valuation techniques used to measure fair value shall maximize the use of relevant observable
inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
It has widely been mentioned that observable inputs should be used to evaluate fair value of an
asset/ liability and we should minimize using any unobservable inputs.
Standard describes the below instances where observable inputs are being used in case of certain
Financial Instruments:
The inputs refer broadly to the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the
asset or liability, including assumptions about risk.
In order to establish comparability and consistency in fair value measurement, Ind AS 113 has
made some hierarchy to define the level of inputs for fair value. The hierarchy is purely based on
the level of inputs available for the specific Asset / liability for which the fair value is to be
measured.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.107
Some significant notes about the fair value hierarchy
• The hierarchy has been categorized in 3 levels which are based on the level of inputs that
are being used to find out such fair values. There could be a situation where more than
one level of fair value is being used, hence standard provides a guidance which states that
in case of using more than one level of input, the entire class of asset / liability will be
defined by its level which has significance on overall basis.
•
•
Note: Significance has not been defined anywhere and could be a matter of judgement.
Standard defines the valuation techniques that could be used to evaluate fair values of
Assets/ liabilities and its level of hierarchy will be depending upon the level of inputs that
have been used while using such valuation techniques.
If an observable input requires an adjustment using an unobservable input and that
adjustment results in a significantly higher or lower fair value measurement, the resulting
measurement would be categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
Example 17
If a market participant would take into account the effect of a restriction on the sale of an asset
when estimating the price for the asset, an entity would adjust the quoted price to reflect the effect
of that restriction. If that quoted price is a Level 2 input and the adjustment is an unobservable
input that is significant to the entire measurement, the measurement would be categorised within
Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
3.15.1 Level 1 Inputs
Level 1 inputs are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
that the entity can access at the measurement date.
A quoted price in an active market provides the most reliable evidence of fair value and shall be
used without adjustment to measure fair value whenever available.
A Level 1 input will be available for many financial assets and financial liabilities, some of which
might be exchanged in multiple active markets (e.g. on different exchanges). Therefore, the
emphasis within Level 1 is on determining both of the following:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.108
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The principal market for the asset or liability or, in the absence of a principal market, the
most advantageous market for the asset or liability
Whether the entity can enter into a transaction for the asset or liability at the price in that
market at the measurement date
Example 18
An entity is holding investment which is quoted in BSE, India and NYSE, USA. However,
significant activities are being done at BSE only. The fair value of the investment would be
referenced to the quoted price at BSE India (which is Level 1 fair value- Direct quoted price with
no adjustments).
3.15.1.1 Adjustment to Quoted Price when it does not reflect the fair price
In certain situations, a quoted price in an active market might not faithfully represent the fair value
of an asset or liability, such as when significant events occur on the measurement date but after
the close of trading. In these situations, companies should adjust the quoted price to incorporate
this new information into the fair value measurement. However, if the quoted price is adjusted,
the resulting fair value measurement would no longer be considered a Level 1 measurement. A
company's valuation policies and procedures should address how these "after-hour" events will
be identified and assessed. Controls should be put in place to ensure that any adjustments made
to quoted prices are appropriate and are applied in a consistent manner.
Example 19
A Ltd., a large biotech company with shares traded publicly, has developed a new drug that is in
the final phase of clinical trials. B Ltd. has an equity investment in A Ltd.'s shares. B Ltd.
determines that the shares have a readily determinable fair value and accounts for the investment
at fair value through profit and loss. B Ltd. assesses the fair value as of the measurement date
of 31st March 20X3. Consider the following:
(i)
(ii)
On 31st March 20X3, the Drug Approval authority notifies A Ltd.'s management that the
drug was not approved. A Ltd.'s shares closed at 36.00 on 31st March 20X3.
A Ltd. issued a press release after markets closed on 31st March 20X3 announcing the
failed clinical trial.
(iii)
A Ltd.'s shares opened on next working day at 22.50.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.109
The drug failure is a condition (or a characteristic of the asset being measured) that existed as of
the measurement date. B Ltd. concludes the 36.00 closing price on the measurement date does
not represent fair value of the A Ltd.'s shares at 31st March 20X3 because the price does not
reflect the effect of the Authority's non-approval.
The subsequent transactions that take place when the market opens are relevant to the fair value
measurement recorded as of the measurement date. The opening price of 22.50 indicates how
market participants have incorporated the effect of the non-approval on A Ltd.'s stock price.
B Ltd. adjusts the 31st March 20X3 quoted price for the new information, records the shares at
 22.50 per share at 31st March 20X3 and discloses the investment as a Level 2 measurement.
3.15.2 Level 2 Inputs
Level 2 inputs are inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for
the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly.
If the asset or liability has a specified (contractual) term, a Level 2 input must be observable for
substantially the full term of the asset or liability. Level 2 inputs include the following:
(a)
quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets.
(b)
(c)
quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability, for example:
(i)
interest rates and yield curves observable at commonly quoted intervals;
(ii)
implied volatilities; and
(iii)
credit spreads.
(iv) market-corroborated inputs.
Examples 20-22
20. Receive-fixed, pay-variable interest rate swap based on a yield curve denominated in a
foreign currency. It requires rate of swap which is of 11 years. However, normally the
rates are available only for the maximum period of 10 years. The rate for 11 years can be
established using extrapolation or some other techniques which is based on 10 years'
available rates of swap. The fair value of 11 years so derived would be level 2 fair value.
21. An entity has an investment in another entity which has no active market. However, some
similar investment is being traded in an active market. Now, the fair valuation can be done
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.110
FINANCIAL REPORTING
based on either the prices based on the market which is not active or similar traded
investment in an active market. This would be considered as level 2 inputs.
22. X and Y each enter into a contractual obligation to pay 500 in cash to D in five years. X
has an AA credit rating and can borrow at 6%. Y has a BBB credit rating and can borrow at
12%. X will receive about 374 in exchange for its promise (the present value of  500 in
five years at 6%). Y will receive about 284 in exchange for its promise (the present value
of 500 in five years at 12%).
The fair value of the liability to each entity (that is, the proceeds) incorporates that entity's
credit standing.
3.15.3 Level 3 Inputs
Level 3 inputs are unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. Unobservable inputs shall be
used to measure fair value to the extent that relevant observable inputs are not available, thereby
allowing for situations in which there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability at the
measurement date. However, the fair value measurement objective remains the same, i.e. an exit
price at the measurement date from the perspective of a market participant that holds the asset
or owes the liability. Therefore, unobservable inputs shall reflect the assumptions that market
participants would use when pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions about risk.
Assumptions about risk include the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique used to
measure fair value (such as a pricing model) and the risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation
technique. A measurement that does not include an adjustment for risk would not represent a fair
value measurement if market participants would include one when pricing the asset or liability.
For example It might be necessary to include a risk adjustment when there is significant
measurement uncertainty (e.g. when there has been a significant decrease in the volume or level
of activity when compared with normal market activity for the asset or liability, or similar assets or
liabilities, and the entity has determined that the transaction price or quoted price does not
represent fair value).
Examples 23 and 24
23. Interest rate swap
An adjustment to a mid-market consensus (non-binding) price for the swap is being
developed using data that are not directly observable and cannot otherwise be corroborated
by observable market data. This would be level 3 input for measurement of fair value.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
24.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.111
Cash-generating unit
A Level 3 input would be a financial forecast (eg of cash flows or profit or loss) developed
using the entity's own data, if there is no reasonably available information that indicates
usage of different assumptions by market participants.
Is Quoted price for an identical item in an active market
available?
No
Yes
Is the Price to be Adjusted?
Yes
No
Are there any significant unobservable
inputs?
Yes
No
Level 1 Input
Are there any significant
unobservable inputs?
Level 3 Input
Level 2 Input
No
Yes
Level 3 Input
Level 2 Input
3.16 DISCLOSURES
An entity shall disclose information that helps users of its financial statements assess both of the
following:
(a) for assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring or non-recurring
basis in the balance sheet after initial recognition, the valuation techniques and inputs used
to develop those measurements.
(b)
for recurring fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3), the
effect of the measurements on profit or loss or other comprehensive income for the period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.112
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The disclosure requirements can be summarized as per the below table -
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value at each
reporting date
Reasons
for
Disclosure
Recurring
Non-recurring
Level Level Level
1
2
3
Level Level Level Level Level Level
1
2
3
1
3
2
measurement
Level of hierarchy
Transfers
✓
Valuation techniques
✓
If change in valuation
techniques
Quantitative info about
significant unobservable
inputs
Reconciliation
opening & closing
of
Unrealized gains/losses
from remeasurement
Valuation process &
policies
Sensitivity to changes
in unobservable inputs
If highest & best use
differs from actual
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.113
3.17 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITIES
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Titan Company Limited'
for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Fair Value Measurement' and accounting policy
adopted by the company with respect to measurement technique.
34.2 (i) Fair value hierarchy
This note explains about basis for determination of fair values of various financial assets and liabilities:
in crore
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.114
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Notes to the Standalone Financial Statements
for the year ended 31st March 2022
(ii) Valuation technique used to determine fair value
Specific value techniques used to value financial instruments include:
the use of quoted market prices for listed instruments.
the fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is determined using forward exchange rates at the
balance sheet date.
the fair value of foreign currency option contracts is determined using option prices obtained from banks.
the fair value of remaining financial instruments is determined using market comparables, discounted cash
flow analysis.
(iii) Fair value of financial assets and liabilities that are not measured at fair vallue but fair value disclosures
are required
The carrying values of financial assets and liabilities approximate the fair values.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - 'Titan Company Limited')
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.115
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
2.
An asset is sold in 2 different active markets at different prices. An entity enters into
transactions in both markets and can access the price in those markets for the asset at the
measurement date.
In Market A:
The price that would be received is 26, transaction costs in that market are 3 and the
costs to transport the asset to that market are 2.
In Market B:
The price that would be received is 25, transaction costs in that market are 1 and the
costs to transport the asset to that market are 2.
You are required to calculate:
(i)
The fair value of the asset, if market A is the principal market, and
(ii) The fair value of the asset, if none of the markets is principal market.
Company J acquires land in a business combination. The land is currently developed for
industrial use as a factory site. Although the land's current use is presumed to be its highest
and best use unless market or other factors suggest a different use, Company J considers
the fact that nearby sites have recently been developed for residential use as high-rise
apartment buildings.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.116
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.
4.
On the basis of that development and recent zoning and other changes to facilitate that
development, Company J determines that the land currently used as a factory site could be
developed as a residential site (e.g., for high-rise apartment buildings) and that market
participants would take into account the potential to develop the site for residential use when
pricing the land.
Determine the highest and best use of the land.
ABC Ltd. acquired 5% equity shares of XYZ Ltd. for 10 crores in the year 20X1-20X2. The
company is in process of preparing the financial statements for the year 20X2-20X3 and is
assessing the fair value at subsequent measurement of the investment made in
XYZ Ltd. Based on the observable input, ABC Ltd. identified a similar nature of transaction
in which PQR Ltd. acquired 20% equity shares in XYZ Ltd. for 60 crores. The price of such
transaction was determined on the basis of Comparable Companies Method (CCM)-
Enterprise Value (EV) / EBITDA which was 8. For the current year, the EBITDA of
XYZ Ltd. is 40 crores. At the time of acquisition, the valuation was determined after
considering 5% of liquidity discount and 5% of non-controlling stake discount. What will be
the fair value of ABC Ltd.'s investment in XYZ Ltd. as on the balance sheet date?
UK Ltd. is in the process of acquisition of shares of PT Ltd. as part of business reorganization
plan. The projected free cash flows of PT Ltd. for the next 5 years are as follows:
( in crores)
The weightage average cost of capital of PT Ltd. is 11%. The total debt as on measurement
date is 1,465 crores and the surplus cash & cash equivalent is 106.14 crores.
The total numbers of shares of PT Ltd. as on the measurement date is 8,52,84,223 shares.
Determine value per share of PT Ltd. as per Income Approach.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Answers
1.
(i)
(ii)
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.117
If Market A is the principal market
If Market A is the principal market for the asset (i.e., the market with the greatest
volume and level of activity for the asset), the fair value of the asset would be
measured using the price that would be received in that market, after taking into
account transport costs.
Fair Value will be
If neither of the market is the principal market
If neither of the market is the principal market for the asset, the fair value of the asset
would be measured using the price in the most advantageous market. The most
advantageous market is the market that maximises the amount that would be received
to sell the asset, after taking into account transaction costs and transport costs (i.e.,
the net amount that would be received in the respective markets).
Since the entity would maximise the net amount that would be received for the asset
in Market B i.e. 22, the fair value of the asset would be measured using the price in
Market B.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
3.
4.118
Fair value
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The highest and best use of the land is determined by comparing the following:
•
•
The value of the land as currently developed for industrial use (i.e., an assumption that
the land would be used in combination with other assets, such as the factory, or with
other assets and liabilities); and
The value of the land as a vacant site for residential use, taking into account the costs
of demolishing the factory and other costs necessary to convert the land to a vacant
site. The value under this use would take into account risks and uncertainties about
whether the entity would be able to convert the asset to the alternative use (i.e., an
assumption that the land would be used by market participants on a stand-alone
basis).
The highest and best use of the land would be determined on the basis of the higher of these
values. In situations involving real estate appraisal, the determination of highest and best use
might take into account factors relating to the factory operations (e.g., the factory's operating
cash flows) and its assets and liabilities (e.g., the factory's working capital).
Determination of Enterprise Value of XYZ Ltd.
Determination of subsequent measurement of XYZ Ltd.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 113
4.119
4.
Determination of equity value of PT Ltd.
( in crore)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
