CHAPTER
7
IND AS ON ITEMS
IMPACTING THE FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS
UNIT 1:
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12: INCOME TAXES
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
List the objective and scope of the standard
Define the terms used in the standard like accounting profit, taxable profit
(tax loss), tax expense (tax income), current tax, deferred tax liabilities,
deferred tax assets, temporary differences, taxable temporary
differences, deductible temporary differences and the tax base
Recognise current tax liabilities and current tax assets
Recognise deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets
Demonstrate when Ind AS permit or require certain assets to be carried
at fair value or to be revalued
Identify the situations where temporary difference may arise on initial
recognition of an asset or liability
Recognise deferred tax asset for all deductible temporary differences
Evaluate the cases, when a deferred tax asset arises on initial
recognition of an asset
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.2
FINANCIAL REPORTING
☐ Measure current tax liabilities (assets) for the current and prior periods
Measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using the tax rates
Identify the items recognised outside profit or loss
Calculate the deferred tax arising from a business combination
Calculate current and deferred tax arising from share-based payment
transactions
Account for tax assets and tax liabilities
Offset tax assets with tax liabilities
Present the tax expense in the Statement of Profit and Loss with respect
to various transactions
Disclose the major components of tax expense (income)
Account for the income taxes on account of changes in the tax status of
an entity or its shareholders.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
UNIT OVERVIEW
Definition
Tax Expense
Accounting profit
Taxable profit (tax loss)
Tax expense (tax income)
Current tax
Deferred tax liabilities
Deferred tax assets
Temporary differences
Taxable temporary differences
Deductible temporary differences
Tax base
• Current Tax
• Deferred Tax
7.3
Current tax
Deferred Tax
Practical Application
Disclosure
Recognition
Measurement
Accounting of Current Tax Effects
• Offsetting Current Tax Assets and Current Tax Liabilities
• Compute carrying amount
• Compute tax base
• Compute temporary differences
• Classify temporary differences
• Identify exceptions
• Assess (also reassess) deductible temporary differences, tax losses and
tax credits
• Determine the tax rate (law)
• Accounting of deferred tax
• Calculate and recognise deferred tax
• Offsetting deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities
• Deferred tax arising from a business combination
• Current and deferred tax arising from share-based payment transactions
• Change in tax status of an entity or its shareholders
• Disclose components of tax expenses (income)
• Tax related to items charged directly to equity
• Tax related to items recognised in statement of other comprehensive
income
• Explanation of the relationship between tax expense (income) and
accounting profit
• Change in tax rates
• Unrecognised deductible temporary differences, unused tax losses and
unused tax credits
• Temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries etc.
Amount of deferred tax liabilities (assets) or income (expense)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.4
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.1 OBJECTIVE
There was a time in India, few decades back when the concept of zero income tax entities was
prevalent. Due to various income tax benefits, these companies had no current tax liability for any
income tax that was payable based on that year's accounting profit. Thus, no provision of income
tax was created. Profit after tax used to be equal to profit before tax. But from accounting
perspective, this was not a correct reflection of results. Quite a few of these tax benefits were
primarily accelerated benefits.
For example, depreciation was deductible in taxation on written down value method (WDV) whereas
in the books of accounts, entities could claim depreciation on straight line method (SLM). As
everybody knows that under WDV method, in initial years' depreciation charge is greater than
depreciation under SLM. This resulted into accounting profits but no taxable profits. But over the
useful life of the asset, depreciation under both methods is equal. In later years, depreciation charge
under SLM would be higher than in depreciation under WDV. Therefore, in later years, in such a
situation, the taxable profits will be higher than the book profits. This will require a higher tax
provision in books when compared to the accounting profits of that year. Basically, this differential
will be due to non-provision of tax liability in an earlier year.
Example 1
An entity has acquired an asset for₹10,000. The depreciation rate as per income tax is 40%
on WDV basis. In books of account, entity claims depreciation on equivalent SLM basis of
16.21%. The entity has accounting and taxable profits of 20,000 from year 1 to year 4,
inclusive, before any allowance of depreciation in either case.
The tax rate is 30%. Assuming no concept of deferred tax, the provision for current tax would be
computed as under:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.5
However, in the books of accounts, the situation will be as under:
Thus, from the above two tables, for an accountant the tax should be
5,514 in all cases as per
the accounting profit. The results are distorted. You will observe that in year 3, in books, the
amount of tax provision is higher by  54 (5,568  5,514) and in year 4, it is higher by 227
(5,741 - 5,514). This is so because in year 1 & 2, these figures are lower by 714 (5,514 – 4,800)
&  234 (5,514  5,280). Thus, the liability that was incurred in year 1 & 2 is paid year 3 onwards.
However, no provision of the differential (714 in year 1 & 234 in year 2) is made.
The provision of differential should have been made by the entity following three major accounting
concepts and convention of periodicity, matching and accrual. The entity has merely deferred the
payment of tax to subsequent year. This understanding and appreciation of situation gave rise to
the concept of deferred tax liabilities or deferred tax assets.
In earlier years, deferred tax was recognised based on concepts of timing differences and permanent
differences based on differences in accounting profits and taxable profits known as income tax
liability method. This concept stands revised with this Accounting Standard which recognised
deferred tax based on temporary differences that arises due to difference in the carrying value of an
item of asset or liability as per books of accounts with the carrying value of that item as per income
tax provisions, known as tax base. This method is known as balance sheet approach.
This Accounting Standard though titled as 'income taxes' primarily deals with deferred tax though
guidance is provided on current tax.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.6
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Temporary Differences
Differences
Other than Temporary
Differences
Taxable Temporary
Difference
(Results in DTL)
Deductible Temporay
Difference
(Results in DTA)
Cannot be
reversed
1.2 SCOPE
The objective of this Standard is to prescribe the accounting treatment for income taxes.
Income taxes for the purpose of this Standard includes:
(a)
all domestic and foreign taxes which are based on taxable profits;
(b)
taxes, such as withholding taxes (Tax Deducted at Source), which are payable by a
subsidiary, associate or joint venture on distributions to the reporting entity.
+
Domestic and Foreign
Taxes;
Including
withholding taxes which
are payable by a
subsidiary, Associate or
Joint Arrangements on
distributions to the
Reporting Entity
Methods of Accounting for
Government Grants or
Investment tax credits (But
it deals with accounting for
temporary
differences
arising from such grants
and investment tax credits)
Further, the income-tax for the purpose of this Standard could be classified as:
(a)
Current tax being current tax consequence that arises due to transactions and other
events of the current period that are recognised in an entity's financial statements.
(b)
Deferred tax being future tax consequence that arises due to the future
(i)
recovery of the carrying amount of assets or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.7
(ii)
settlement of carrying amount of the liabilities that are recognised in an
entity's balance sheet. For example: Recovery of fixed assets means by way
of depreciation or sale and for other assets by way of realization.
Before we proceed further, it is essential to understand the fundamental principle in
recognising deferred tax. This is enunciated in the Standard as under:
It is inherent in the recognition of an asset or liability that the reporting entity expects to
recover or settle the carrying amount of that asset or liability. If it is probable that recovery
or settlement of that carrying amount will make future tax payments larger (smaller) than they
would be if such recovery or settlement were to have no tax consequences, this Standard
requires an entity to recognise a deferred tax liability (deferred tax asset).
Let us try to understand the aforesaid principle with the help of an example:
Example 2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Whenever an entity recognises an asset, it expects that it will recover the carrying
value of that asset. For example, if an entity recognises an item of land at
1,00,000, it expects that it will be able to recover at least 1,00,000 if that land is
sold sometime in the future.
Assume that under the income tax provisions, if this piece of land is sold after holding
it for more than one year, there will be an indexation benefit @ 10% per year. Thus,
if the land is sold after one year, the cost of the land will for the purpose of taxation
will be assumed at  1,10,000 ( 1,00,000 + 10%). If it is sold after two years, the
cost of the land for the purpose of taxation will be assumed at 1,21,000 (1,10,000
+ 10%).
The tax rate in all years continues to be flat 30%.
Thus, the recovery of the carrying value of land after two years will result into a tax
saving of 6,300 i.e. 30% of 21,000 (1,21,000-1,00,000). For instance, if after two
and half years, the land is sold for 1,50,000, the entity will pay a tax of 8,700 at
30% of  29,000 (₹1,50,000  ₹1,21,000). If there would have been no indexation
benefits, the tax liability would have been 15,000 at 30% of ₹50,000 ( 1,50,000
  1,00,000). Saving in tax is of ₹ 6,300 (15,000-8,700).
In view of the above savings, the entity should recognise a deferred tax asset of
6,300 in this case in Year 1.
This principle has to be applied to each item of asset or liability.
Note: There are controversial views in case of Indexation of land for a temporary difference
because if the land is not going to be sold in a near future particularly in business then in such
case it is not advisable to calculate temporary difference.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.8
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Standard also provides guidance as to where the current tax or deferred tax should be
recognised, accounted and presented.
An entity may incur a loss in the current period and set off against a profit in the earlier period.
As the entity would recover a tax paid in the earlier year, the entity should recognize the
benefit of tax recoverable as an asset.
Items of current tax or defer tax recognized in profit and loss are subject to two exceptions:
1.
2.
An item of current tax or defer tax pertaining to other comprehensive income should
be recognized in other comprehensive income
An item of current tax or defer tax pertaining to direct equity should be recognized
in direct equity
Tax Accounting
Transactions and Events recognised
Outside Profit and Loss
Transactions and events
recognised in Profit or Loss
Related Tax effects
recognised in Other
Related Tax Effect recognised in
Comprehensive Income
Statement of changes in Equity
Related Tax effects also
recognised in Profit or
Loss
In addition, the Standard deals with the:
(a) recognition of deferred tax assets arising from unused tax losses or unused tax credits;
(b)
presentation of income taxes in the financial statements; and
(c)
disclosure of information relating to income taxes.
The recognition of deferred tax
assets arising from unused tax
losses or unused tax credits
The presentation of income taxes
in the financial statements and
The disclosure of information
relating to income taxes
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.9
The Standard however, does not deal with the methods of accounting for government grants
(see Ind AS 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government
Assistance) or investment tax credits. However, it deals with the accounting for temporary
differences that may arise from such grants or investment tax credits.
1.3 DEFINITIONS
Having understood, the basic concepts of current tax and deferred tax, the following definitions
needs to be appreciated:
(a)
Accounting profit is profit or loss for a period before deducting tax expense.
(b)
Taxable profit (tax loss) is the profit (loss) for a period, computed as per the income tax act,
upon which income taxes are payable (recoverable).
(c)
Tax expense (tax income) is the aggregate amount included in the determination of profit or
loss for the period in respect of current tax and deferred tax.
(d)
Current tax is the amount of income taxes payable (recoverable) in respect of the taxable
profit (tax loss) for a period.
(e)
Deferred tax liabilities are the amounts of income taxes payable in future periods in respect
of taxable temporary differences.
(f)
Deferred tax assets are the amounts of income taxes recoverable in future periods in respect
of:
deductible temporary differences;
>
the carry forward of unused tax losses; and
the carry forward of unused tax credits.
(g)
Temporary differences are differences between the carrying amount of an asset or liability
in the balance sheet and its tax base.
(h)
Temporary differences may be either:
taxable temporary differences, which are temporary differences that will result in
taxable amounts in determining taxable profit (tax loss) of future periods when the
carrying amount of the asset or liability is recovered or settled; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.10
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(i)
deductible temporary differences, which are temporary differences that will result in
amounts that are deductible in determining taxable profit (tax loss) of future periods
when the carrying amount of the asset or liability is recovered or settled.
Comparison with AS 22:
Timing differences are the differences between taxable income and accounting
income for a period that originate in one period and are capable of reversal in one or
more subsequent periods.
Thus, it can be seen that while AS 22 spoke of timing differences with reference to
income, Ind AS 12 speaks of temporary differences with reference to carrying amounts
and tax bases of assets and liabilities. In other words, AS 22 adopts a $P/L$ approach,
whereas Ind AS 12 adopts a balance sheet approach towards accounting for taxes on
income.
The tax base of an asset or liability is the carrying amount to that asset or liability for tax
purposes.
To facilitate, easy understanding, this chapter has been divided as under:
(a)
Part A: Tax Expense
(b)
Part B: Current Tax, its Recognition, Measurement and Presentation
(c)
Part C: Deferred Tax, its Recognition, Measurement and Presentation
(d)
Part D: Practical Application
(e)
Part E: Disclosures
1.4 PART A: TAX EXPENSE (TAX INCOME)
Tax expense or tax income is the aggregate amount included in the determination of profit or
loss for the period in respect of current tax and deferred tax.
The following needs to be appreciated:
(a)
Tax expense could be positive or negative. Thus, there could be a tax income.
(b)
Tax expense is the aggregate of:
current tax; and
deferred tax.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.11
1.5 PART B: CURRENT
ITS
RECOGNITION,
TAX,
MEASUREMENT AND PRESENTATION
1.5.1 Current Tax
Current tax is the amount of income taxes payable (recoverable) in respect of the taxable profit (tax
loss) for a period.
1.5.2 Recognition
(a) Current tax liability
(b)
Current tax for current and prior periods shall, to the extent unpaid, be recognised as
a liability.
The exact liability of current tax crystallises only on preparation and finalisation of
financial statements at the end of the reporting period.
Any excess of this liability over the prepaid taxes (advance tax) and withhold taxes
(TDS) is to be treated as current liability. This liability may be for the current reporting
period or may relate to earlier reporting periods.
Current tax assets
If the amount already paid in respect of current and prior periods exceeds the amount due for
those periods, the excess shall be recognised as an asset.
1.5.3 Measurement
(a) Current tax liabilities (assets) for the current and prior periods shall be measured at the
amount expected to be paid to (recovered from) the taxation authorities, using the tax rates
(and tax laws) that have been enacted.
(b)
Uncertain tax position interpretations
An entity computes its current income-taxes in accordance with the provisions
contained in the taxation laws. Taxation laws provide certain benefits or require
enhancements in accordance with the fiscal, economic and other policies of the
country. These at times are prone to varying interpretations and settled by the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.12
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(c)
appellate authorities after a considerable period from the reporting period. The
taxability remains uncertain.
Ind AS 12 requires that current tax liabilities or assets for the current period or the
period should be computed based on the amount it expects to pay. It is suggested
that statistical tools may be used in computing the current tax with respect to the
uncertain tax interpretations.
Thus, computation of current tax at best is an estimate. Any change in this estimate
based on subsequent developments should be treated as a change in estimate in
accordance with Ind AS 8.
Enacted or substantive enacted
>
The tax rates in computing the current tax should be based on taxation laws that have
enacted or substantively enacted.
A proposed legislation is enacted when all the formalities with respect to the legislation
is completed. In India, the enactment occurs when the legislation is notified in the
gazette on and from the date it comes into force as mentioned in the said gazette
notification.
Implicit in the word 'substantively enacted' is the emphasis that in the relevant situation
the enactment process is not fully completed. The process of enactment of a taxation
law in India is as under:
*
Finance bill is presented in Lok Sabha of Indian Parliament.
It is discussed and passed by the Lok Sabha.
It then moves to Rajya Sabha of Indian Parliament.
It is discussed in the Rajya Sabha.
It is then presented before the President for assent.
It is then notified in the gazette of India.
Now, at which stage an entity should conclude that the legislation is substantively
enacted becomes a key consideration. More so, the finance bill in India is normally
presented on the last day of February and is enacted by the $3^{rd}$ week of May. The
reporting period of most of the entities ends on 31st March and listed entities attempt
to issue their financial statements within 4-6 weeks of the reporting date.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.13
Ind AS 12 does not provide any guidance.
It is therefore suggested that the entity should explicitly disclose in its financial
statements the accounting policy with respect to the adoption of tax rates based on
the principle of 'substantive enactment'. Needless to add, the policy should be applied
consistently. If material, the variation due to adoption of rates based on 'substantive
enactment' should also be disclosed.
1.5.4 Accounting of Current Tax Effects
(a)
(b)
(c)
The accounting of current tax effects of a transaction of an event is consistent with the
accounting for that transaction or event.
The current tax effects of a transaction shall follow its accounting treatment if the item is
recognised in statement of profit or loss, its current tax effect will be recognised in statement
of profit or loss.
For further discussion on this topic, refer Accounting for Deferred Tax.
1.5.5 Offsetting Current Tax Assets and Current Tax Liabilities
(a)
(b)
(c)
An entity shall offset current tax assets and current tax liabilities if, and only if, the entity:
has a legally enforceable right to set off the recognised amounts; and
intends either to settle on a net basis, or to realise the asset and settle the liability
simultaneously.
Although current tax assets and liabilities are separately recognised and measured they are
offset in the balance sheet subject to criteria similar to those established for financial
instruments in Ind AS 32. An entity will normally have a legally enforceable right to set off a
current tax asset against a current tax liability when they relate to income taxes levied by the
same taxation authority and the taxation laws permit the entity to make or receive a single
net payment.
In consolidated financial statements, a current tax asset of one entity in a group is offset
against a current tax liability of another entity in the group if, and only if, the entities concerned
have a legally enforceable right to make or receive a single net payment and the entities
intend to make or receive such a net payment or to recover the asset and settle the liability
simultaneously.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.14
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 1A
H Ltd. is a manufacturing company, wanting to calculate its taxable profit or loss for the year
ended 31 March 20X8. The statement of profit and loss and other comprehensive income, the
balance sheet and the notes are given below.
Tax rate for the financial year 20X7-20X8 is 30%, but the new tax rate of 32%, for the year
20X8-20X9 and beyond, has already been enacted before the year end.
Calculate taxable profit for the financial year 20X7-20X8 and the related current tax expense.
Balance Sheet as of 31 March 20X8
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.15
Extract of Statement of profit and loss for the year ended 31 March 20X8
Notes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Depreciation expense for the year financial year 20X7-20X8 allowable as per the Income Tax
Rules is 72,10,000. Depreciation as allowed for the purposes of financial reporting included
in operating costs is 59,50,000. Cost of PPE is  5,60,00,000 and H Ltd. deducted
expenses of 1,45,60,000 in its tax returns prior to financial year 20X7-20X8. Further, as of
31 March 20X8,  Ltd. for the first time revalued its property, plant and equipment to market
value of 4,20,00,000 (revaluation surplus $=\mp30,80,000)$.
In 20X4-20X5, H Ltd. incurred product development costs of 35,00,000. These costs were
recognized as an asset and amortized over period of 10 years. For tax purposes,
H Ltd. deducted full product development costs when they were in 20X4-20X5.
Trading investments were acquired in the preceding year at a cost of  80,50,000. These
investments are classified as at fair value through profit or loss and thus recognized in their
fair value. Fair value adjustments are not allowable by the tax authorities.
Bad debt provision amounts to  45,50,000 and relates to 2 debtors: debtor A - 28,00,000
(receivable originates in 20X5-20X6 and 100% provision was recognized in the preceding
year) and debtor B –  17,50,000 (receivable originates in 20X6-20X7 and 100% provision
was recognized in F. Y. 20X7-20X8). Tax law allows deduction of 20% of provision for debtors
overdue for more than 1 year, another 30% for debtors overdue for more than 2 years and
remaining 50% for debtors overdue for more than 3 years.
5.
H Ltd. created a provision for inventory obsolescence in accordance with Ind AS 2
requirements. New provision created in 20X7-20X8 was 3,78,000 (total provision:
6,30,000). Being a general provision, this provision is not tax deductible.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.
7.16
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Government grants are not taxable. Full government grant received in 20X7-20X8 is included
in the balance sheet.
7.
In 20X7-20X8, H Ltd. increased a liability for product warranty costs by  1,75,000. Product
warranty costs are not tax deductible until the company pays claims. Claims paid in
20X7-20X8 amounted to 2,17,000.
8.
During the year, H Ltd. introduced health care benefits for employees. The expenses are
allowable for tax purposes only when benefits are paid but in line with Ind AS 19, recognized
in profit or loss when employees provide service.
9.
Penalties towards violation of laws included in operating expenses amount to 63,000. These
are not deductible for tax purposes.
10.
Tax law allows to deduct expenses for petrol only up to 1,40,000 per vehicle per year.
H Ltd. had 4 vehicles in 20X7-20X8 and its total petrol expenses amounted to 7,21,000.
Note: This illustration is prepared for the purposes of understanding the computation of current tax
and is in no way based on the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961. For the purposes of Financial
Reporting, the tax treatments will be given in the question.
Solution:
Calculation of current tax expense
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.17
Journal Entry
Profit or loss - Current income tax expense
To Credit Current income tax liabilities
Working Notes:
Dr.
28,14,000
28,14,000
1. Product development costs:
Annual amortization (35,00,000/10)
3,50,000
2.
Bad debt provisions:
Debtor A - 28,00,000 from 20X5-20X6
> 2 years - 30% deductible in 20X7-20X8
8,40,000
Debtor B-17,50,000 from 20X6-20X7
> 1 year - 20% deductible in 20X7-20X8
Total - tax deductible in 20X7-20X8
3,50,000
11,90,000
3.
Petrol expenses
Actual expenses
Tax deductible $(4\times140,000)$
Excess
7,21,000
5,60,000
1,61,000
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.18
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.6 PART C: DEFERRED TAX, ITS RECOGNITION,
MEASUREMENT AND PRESENTATION
The following steps should be followed in the recognition, measurement and presentation of
deferred tax liabilities or assets:
Step 1:
Compute carrying amounts of assets and liabilities
Step 2:
Compute tax base
Step 3:
Compute temporary differences
Step 4:
Classify temporary differences into either:
Taxable temporary difference
Deductible temporary difference
Step 5:
Identify exceptions
Step 6:
Assess deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits
Step 7:
Determine the tax rate
Step 8:
Calculate and recognise deferred tax
Step 9:
Accounting of deferred tax
Step 10:
Offsetting of deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets
These are now discussed in detail.
1.6.1 Step 1: Compute carrying amount
For the purpose of this Standard, we can define carrying amount at which an asset or liability is
recognised in the balance sheet, after making necessary adjustments like depreciation, impairment,
etc. In other words, carrying amount of the assets and liabilities means balance as per the ledger.
Example 3
Entity A had acquired an item of plant and machinery for
1,00,000 on 1st April, 20X1. It
depreciated this item @ 10% per annum on SLM basis. For the year ended 31st March, 20X2, it
provides depreciation of  10,000. The carrying amount of this item of plant and machinery as on
31st March, 20X2 is 90,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.19
1.6.2 Step 2: Compute tax base
(a) The tax base of an asset or liability is the amount attributed to that asset or liability for tax
purposes.
Example 4
Entity A had acquired an item of plant and machinery for 1,00,000 on 1st April, 20X1. It
depreciated this item @ 10% per annum on SLM basis. For the year ended 31st March,
20X2, it provides depreciation of ₹10,000. The carrying amount of this item of plant and
machinery as on 31st March, 20X2 is₹90,000. As per taxation laws, this item of plant and
machinery has to be depreciated @ 30% per annum on WDV basis. Thus, the entity, for
the purposes of taxation, computes depreciation of 30,000. The tax base of this item of
plant and machinery is₹70,000 (₹ 1,00,000  ₹ 30,000).
In the above scenario, if Entity A decides to revalue the item of plant and machinery and
measures it at 1,50,000, the carrying value of the item of plant and machinery will be
 1,50,000. For tax purposes, if the revaluation is ignored, the tax base remains  70,000
(Initial cost 1,00,000 – ₹ 30,000).
(b) Four scenarios could be anticipated for computation of the tax base of either an asset or a
liability:
Tax base of an asset.
Tax base of a liability.
Items with a tax base but no carrying amount.
Items of assets and liabilities where tax base is not apparent.
Let us examine and compute tax base under each of the four scenarios:
Tax base of an asset
(i)
The principle to compute tax base of an asset is as under:
*
The tax base of an asset is the amount that will be deductible for tax purposes
against any taxable economic benefits that will flow to an entity when it recovers
the carrying amount of the asset.
The carrying amount of the asset could be recovered either through sale of the
asset or through its use or partly through use and partly through sale. The
method of recovery has to be determined at each reporting date.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.20
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Examples 5-9
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.21
very year it is created. The amount recovered is a taxable economic
benefit. For tax purposes, entity will be entitled for a deduction of
 950 against this recovery of trade receivable. The tax base is 950.
If those economic benefits will not be taxable, the tax base of the asset is equal
to its carrying amount.
It is quite feasible that in certain cases, the economic benefits that are derived
from the recovery of an asset are not taxable. In these situations, the tax base
of the asset is taken at its carrying amount.
Examples 10 & 11
10. An entity has an investment in listed equity shares. There is no tax on
gains that arise on sale of these listed equity shares. Thus, the tax
base in this case will be the carrying amount of the investments.
11.
An entity has given a loan of
10,000 which is the carrying amount.
The repayment of loan has no tax consequences. The tax base is
10,000.
(ii) Tax base of a liability
The principle to compute tax base of a liability is as under:
The tax base of a liability is its carrying amount, less any amount that will be
deductible for tax purposes in respect of that liability in future periods.
Examples 12 & 13
12. Current liabilities include accrued expenses with a carrying amount of
100. The related expense will be deducted for tax purposes on a
cash basis.
The tax base of the accrued expenses is nil.
13. Current liabilities include accrued expenses with a carrying amount of
100. The related expense has already been deducted for tax
purposes.
The tax base of the accrued expenses is ₹100.
If those liabilities are not tax deductible, the tax base of that liability is equal to
its carrying amount.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.22
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 14
Current liabilities include accrued fines and penalties with a carrying amount
of 100. Fines and penalties are not deductible for tax purposes.
The tax base of the accrued fines and penalties is  100.
It is an other than temporary difference, as the expenses are not allowable as
per income tax.
Example 15
A loan payable has a carrying amount of 100. The repayment of the loan
will have no tax consequences.
The tax base of the loan is  100.
In the case of revenue which is received in advance, the tax base of the
resulting liability is its carrying amount, less any amount of the revenue that will
not be taxable in future periods.
Example 16
Current liabilities include interest revenue received in advance, with a
carrying amount of 100. The related interest revenue was taxed on a cash
basis.
The tax base of the interest received in advance is nil.
(iii) Items with a tax base but no carrying amount
There are certain items that have a tax base but no carrying amount. These
include items that are charged to revenue statement in the period in which they
are incurred but are allowed as a deduction over a number of periods as per
the taxation laws.
Examples 17 & 18
17. A Limited has been incorporated recently. It incurred 1,00,000 on its
incorporation. It has been charged to revenue in the very first
accounting period. The taxation laws allow deduction over a period of
5 years. The carrying amount at the end of year 1 is Nil.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.23
The tax base will be  80,000 (20,000 x 4) as
20,000 being 1/5th is
allowable as a deduction in taxation laws over 4 years.
18. Public issue expenses. The entity may have written off the public issue
expenses in the very first year. But since tax laws permit deduction
over 5 years, the temporary differences will exist till complete
deduction is claimed in taxation laws.
(iv) Items of assets and liabilities where tax base is not apparent
There could be situations where it may be difficult to compute the tax base of
an item. One however, knows the carrying amount. This is because of the
provisions of taxation laws. Whereas in books of accounts, all or most of the
revenue and gains are included as part of one single performance statement,
in the taxation laws they are charged under different head.
The taxable amount amongst other things depends under which head an item
at the time of recovery may be charged. In India, income or gains are charged
either as 'Salaries', 'Income from house property', 'Profits and gains of
business', 'Capital Gain' & 'Income from other sources'. Further certain specific
or weighted deductions are also permissible. For example, rental income is
subject to a flat deduction. So how will you compute the rental income received
in advance? Moreover, there are cases depending upon the substance of the
transaction, the rental income is to be charged as business income. At times,
reverse may be the case. Many more similar situations could be anticipated.
Example 19
Entity A has an industrial undertaking that consists of land, building, plant and
machinery. It is contemplating disposing the entity. It has the option to
recover the carrying amount of the entity either by disposing the entire entity
as a slump sale or dispose of each asset on a piecemeal basis. Depending
upon the manner of recovery and period of holding, the carrying amount may
be subject to indexation benefit, the recovery may be charged either as a
business profit or capital gains. Again, it could be long-term gain capital gain
or short-term capital gain. As at the end of the reporting period, the entity is
not sure of the manner and time of recovery.
So, how should one proceed with the determination of the tax base? It is a
matter of judgment. The Standard states that one should refer the fundamental
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.24
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(c)
principle as enumerated in the Standard. The principle is reproduced
hereunder:
It is inherent in the recognition of an asset or liability that the reporting entity
expects to recover or settle the carrying amount of that asset or liability. If it
is probable that recovery or settlement of that carrying amount will make
future tax payments larger (smaller) than they would be if such recovery or
settlement were to have no tax consequences, this Standard requires an
entity to recognise a deferred tax liability (deferred tax asset)
It is recommended, if material, the basis of judgment and related uncertainties
should be disclosed.
Tax base is determined with reference to the tax returns of each entity. This poses no
problems when computing tax base of a stand-alone entity. In some jurisdiction, taxation
laws, in the case of a group permits a consolidated tax return. In such cases, tax bases
should be determined based on a consolidated tax return. If this is not so, then the basis
should be individual tax returns. The carrying amount in both the cases shall be determined
on the basis of consolidated financial statements.
Illustration 1B (in continuation to Illustration 1A):
Based on the balance sheet and notes of H Ltd. from previous example, calculate tax base of its
assets and liabilities as of 31 March 20X8. Note that balance sheet has been adjusted by current
tax expense and liability.
Balance Sheet as of 31 March 20X8
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.25
Remaining information are same as per Illustration 1A.
Solution:
Determination of Tax Base
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.26
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Working Notes:
*****
1.6.3 Step 3: Compute temporary differences
In respect of
Deductible Temporary
Differences
Deferred
Tax Assets
Temporary
Differences
In respect of carry
forward of unused
tax losses
In respect of carry
forward of unused
tax credit
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Deferred Tax
Liabilities
In respect of
Taxable Temporary
Differences
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.27
(a)
(b)
The term temporary difference is defined as the difference between the carrying amount of
an asset or liability in the balance sheet and its tax base.
Example 20
An entity has an item of plant and machinery acquired on the first day of the reporting
period for 1,00,000. It depreciates it @ 20% p.a on SLM basis. The carrying amount in
balance sheet is 80,000. The taxation laws require depreciation @ 30% on WDV basis.
The tax base at the end of the reporting period is₹70,000. The temporary difference is
 10,000 ( 80,000 – ₹70,000).
The contention in favour of temporary difference is that at the end of the day, all differences
between the carrying amount and tax base of an asset or liability will reverse. At most the
entity may be able to delay the timing of reversal but the difference will ultimately have
reversed, therefore the term 'temporary difference' is used. The cumulative impact is 'zero'.
Example 21
An entity acquires an asset on the first day of reporting period for 120 with a useful life
of 6 years and no residual value. It depreciates the asset on SLM basis. The tax rate is
30%. The tax depreciation is as assumed in the computation below.
The following computations are performed.
Financial Statements
Tax Computation
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.28
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Temporary Difference
Movement in Balance Sheet
(c)
To some, it may appear that temporary differences and timing differences are one and the
same term. It is not so. It can however, be said that temporary difference includes timing
differences. Timing differences arise when income or expense is included in accounting
profit in one period but is included in taxable profit in a different period.
(d) Examples of temporary differences in the nature of timing differences are as under.
Example 22
Interest income recognized in income statement on a time proportion basis but
recognized in taxable profit on cash basis as and when income is received.
Depreciation used in determining taxable income may differ from that used in
determining accounting profit.
Development costs may be capitalized and amortize over future periods in determining
accounting profit but deducted in determining taxable profit in the period in which they
are incurred.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.29
(e) Examples of temporary differences other than in the nature of timing differences are as
under:
Example 23: Business combinations
The identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are
recognised at their fair values in accordance with Ind AS 103, Business Combinations, but
no equivalent adjustment is made for tax purposes.
With limited exceptions, the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a
business combination are recognised at their fair values at the acquisition date. Temporary
differences arise when the tax bases of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities
assumed are not affected by the business combination or are affected differently.
For example, when the carrying amount of an asset is increased to fair value but the tax
base of the asset remains at cost to the previous owner, a taxable temporary difference
arises which results in a deferred tax liability. However, it may be noted that the resulting
deferred tax liability affects goodwill.
Example 24: Revaluation: assets are revalued and no equivalent adjustment is made
for tax purposes.
Indian Accounting Standards permit or require certain assets to be carried at fair value or
to be revalued (see, for example, Ind AS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment, Ind AS 38,
Intangible Assets, Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments and Ind AS 116 Leases).
In some jurisdictions, the revaluation or other restatement of an asset to fair value affects
taxable profit (tax loss) for the current period. As a result, the tax base of the asset is
adjusted and no temporary difference arises.
In other jurisdictions, the revaluation or restatement of an asset does not affect taxable
profit in the period of the revaluation or restatement and, consequently, the tax base of the
asset is not adjusted.
Nevertheless, the future recovery of the carrying amount will result in a taxable flow of
economic benefits to the entity and the amount that will be deductible for tax purposes will
differ from the amount of those economic benefits. The difference between the carrying
amount of a revalued asset and its tax base is a temporary difference and gives rise to a
deferred tax liability or asset.
This is true even if:
(a) the entity does not intend to dispose of the asset. In such cases, the revalued carrying
amount of the asset will be recovered through use and this will generate taxable
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.30
FINANCIAL REPORTING
income which exceeds the depreciation that will be allowable for tax purposes in future
periods; or
(b) tax on capital gains is deferred if the proceeds of the disposal of the asset are invested
in similar assets. In such cases, the tax will ultimately become payable on sale or use
of the similar assets.
1.6.4 Step 4: Classify temporary differences
(a) Temporary differences are to be classified into:
>
Taxable temporary differences
Deductible temporary differences
(b) Taxable temporary differences are those temporary differences that results in taxable
amounts in determining taxable profit (tax loss) of future periods when the carrying amount
of the asset or liability is recovered or settled.
As the name 'taxable temporary difference' suggests, these are the temporary differences
that will be taxed in future. These taxable temporary differences will increase tax liabilities.
All taxable temporary differences, subject to limited exceptions, give rise to deferred tax
liability.
Taxable temporary difference arises where the:
>
carrying amount of an asset exceeds its tax base; or
tax base of a liability exceeds its carrying amount.
Example 25
An asset which costs 150 has a carrying amount of 100. Cumulative depreciation
for tax purposes is 90 and the tax rate is 25%.
The tax base of the asset is 60 (cost of 150 less cumulative tax depreciation of
 90). To recover the carrying amount of 100, the entity must earn taxable income
of 100 but will only be able to deduct tax depreciation of 60. Consequently, the
entity will pay income taxes of  10 (40 at 25%) when it recovers the carrying
amount of the asset. The difference between the carrying amount of 100 and the
tax base of 60 is a taxable temporary difference of ₹40.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.31
(c)
(d)
Deductible temporary differences are those temporary differences that results in amounts that
are deductible in determining taxable profit (tax loss) of future periods when the carrying
amount of the asset or liability is recovered or settled.
Again, it should be noted, the name 'deductible temporary difference' suggests, these are the
temporary differences that will be deducted in future when computing the tax liability. These
deductible temporary differences will reduce tax liabilities. All deductible temporary
differences, subject to exceptions/recognition criteria, give rise to deferred tax assets.
Deductible temporary difference arises where the:
carrying amount of a liability exceeds its tax base; or
tax base of an asset exceeds its carrying amount.
Example 26
An entity recognises a liability of 100 for gratuity and leave encashment expenses
by creating a provision for gratuity and leave encashment. For tax purposes, any
amount with regard to gratuity and leave encashment will not be deductible until the
entity pays the same. The tax rate is 25%.
The tax base of the liability is nil (carrying amount of 100, less the amount that will
be deductible for tax purposes in respect of that liability in future periods). In settling
the liability for its carrying amount, the entity will reduce its future taxable profit by
an amount of 100 and, consequently, reduce its future tax payments by 25 ( 
100 at 25%). The difference between the carrying amount of 100 and the tax base
of nil is a deductible temporary difference of 100.
Based on the above discussions, a matrix as under may be drawn:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.32
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(e) Further examples of taxable temporary differences:
Transactions that affect profit or loss
Example 27
Transactions that affect the balance sheet
Example 28
1.
2.
Depreciation of an asset is not deductible for tax purposes and no deduction
will be available for tax purposes when the asset is sold or scrapped.
A borrower records a loan at the proceeds received (which equal the amount
due at maturity), less transaction costs. Subsequently, the carrying amount
of the loan is increased by amortisation of the transaction costs to accounting
profit using effective rate of interest. The transaction costs were deducted
for tax purposes in the period when the loan was first recognised.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.33
3.
4.
A loan payable was measured on initial recognition at the amount of the net
proceeds, net of transaction costs. The transaction costs are amortised to
accounting profit over the life of the loan. Those transaction costs are not
deductible in determining the taxable profit of future, current or prior periods.
The liability component of a compound financial instrument (for example a
convertible bond) is measured at a discount to the amount repayable on
maturity (see Ind AS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation). The discount
is not deductible in determining taxable profit (tax loss).
Fair value adjustments and revaluation
Example 29
1. Financial assets are carried at fair value which exceeds cost, but no
equivalent adjustment is made for tax purposes.
2.
An entity revalues property, plant and equipment (under the revaluation model
treatment in Ind AS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment) but no equivalent
adjustment is made for tax purposes.
Business combinations and consolidation
Example 30
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The carrying amount of an asset is increased to fair value in a business
combination and no equivalent adjustment is made for tax purposes.
Reductions in the carrying amount of goodwill are not deductible in
determining taxable profit and the cost of the goodwill would not be deductible
on disposal of the business.
Unrealised losses resulting from intragroup transactions are eliminated by
inclusion in the carrying amount of inventory or property, plant and equipment.
Retained earnings of subsidiaries, branches, associates and joint ventures
are included in consolidated retained earnings, but income taxes will be
payable if the profits are distributed to the reporting parent.
Investments in foreign subsidiaries, branches or associates or interests in
foreign joint ventures are affected by changes in foreign exchange rates.
The non-monetary assets and liabilities of an entity are measured in its
functional currency but the taxable profit or tax loss is determined in a
different currency.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.34
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(f)
Hyperinflation
Example 31
Non-monetary assets are restated in terms of the measuring unit current at the end
of the reporting period (see Ind AS 29, Financial Reporting in Hyperinflationary
Economies) and no equivalent adjustment is made for tax purposes.
Further examples of deductible temporary differences:
Transactions that affect profit or loss
Example 32
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Retirement benefit costs are deducted in determining accounting profit as
service is provided by the employee, but are not deducted in determining
taxable profit until the entity pays either retirement benefits or contributions
to a fund. (note: similar deductible temporary differences arise where other
expenses, such as gratuity and leave encashment or interest, are deductible
on a cash basis in determining taxable profit.)
Accumulated depreciation of an asset in the financial statements is greater
than the cumulative depreciation allowed up to the end of the reporting period
for tax purposes.
The cost of inventories sold before the end of the reporting period is deducted
in determining accounting profit when goods or services are delivered but is
deducted in determining taxable profit when cash is collected. (it may be
noted, there is also a taxable temporary difference associated with the related
trade receivable.)
The net realisable value of an item of inventory, or the recoverable amount of
an item of property, plant or equipment, is less than the previous carrying
amount and an entity therefore reduces the carrying amount of the asset, but
that reduction is ignored for tax purposes until the asset is sold.
Preliminary expenses (or organisation or other start-up costs) are recognised
as an expense in determining accounting profit but are not permitted as a
deduction in determining taxable profit until a later period.
Income is deferred in the balance sheet but has already been included in
taxable profit in current or prior periods.
A government grant which is included in the balance sheet as deferred income
will not be taxable in future periods.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.35
Fair value adjustments and revaluation
Example 33
Financial assets are carried at fair value which is less than cost, but no equivalent
adjustment is made for tax purposes.
Business combinations and consolidation
Example 34
1.
2.
3.
4.
A liability is recognised at its fair value in a business combination, but none
of the related expense is deducted in determining taxable profit until a later
period.
Unrealised profits resulting from intragroup transactions are eliminated from
the carrying amount of assets, such as inventory or property, plant or
equipment, but no equivalent adjustment is made for tax purposes.
Investments in foreign subsidiaries, branches or associates or interests in
foreign joint ventures are affected by changes in foreign exchange rates.
The non-monetary assets and liabilities of an entity are measured in its
functional currency but the taxable profit or tax loss is determined in a
different currency.
Deferred tax liabilities are created for all taxable temporary differences with
limited exceptions. Similarly, deferred tax assets are created for all deductible
temporary differences subject to limited exceptions and recognition criteria. In
Step 5 we will discuss the exceptions with respect to creation to deferred tax
and in Step 6 we will discuss the recognition criteria area for deferred tax
assets. However, before we proceed further, let's discuss the principle in
recognising deferred tax liabilities or deferred tax asset.
These are:
(A) Deferred tax liability
• A deferred tax liability shall be recognized for all taxable
temporary differences, except to the extent that the deferred tax
liability arises from:
(a)
the initial recognition of goodwill; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.36
FINANCIAL REPORTING
•
(b)
the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a
transaction which:
(i)
is not a business combination; and
(ii)
(iii)
at the time of the transaction, affects neither
accounting profit nor taxable profit (tax loss)
at the time of the transaction, does not give rise to
equal taxable and deductible temporary
differences.
However, for taxable temporary differences associated with
investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates, and
interests in joint ventures, a deferred tax liability shall be
recognised in accordance with paragraph 39 of Ind AS 12.
(B) Deferred tax asset
• A deferred tax asset shall be recognized for all deductible
temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that taxable
profit will be available against which the deductible temporary
difference can be utilised, unless the deferred tax asset arises
from the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction
that:
(a)
is not a business combination; and
(b)
(c)
at the time of the transaction, affects neither accounting
profit nor taxable profit (tax loss).
at the time of the transaction, does not give rise to equal
taxable and deductible temporary differences.
•
However, for deductible temporary differences associated with
investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates, and
interests in joint ventures, a deferred tax asset shall be
recognised in accordance with paragraph 44 of Ind AS 12.
From a reading of the aforesaid principles, deferred tax liabilities and deferred
tax assets needs to be recognised in most of the cases. But the recognition of
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.37
deferred tax liabilities or deferred tax assets are subject to exceptions with
respect to the following items:
(a)
the initial recognition of goodwill arising in a business combination
(exception 1);
(b)
the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction which:
(i)
is not a business combination; and
(ii)
at the time of the transaction, affects neither accounting profit
nor taxable profit (tax loss) (exception 2);
(iii)
at the time of the transaction, does not give rise to equal taxable
and deductible temporary differences.
(c) temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries,
branches and associates, and interests in joint ventures (exception 3).
These exceptions are discussed in Step 5.
Also deferred tax assets should be created only to the extent of the probability
of availability of taxable profits. In case, this probability of availability of taxable
profits is missing, deferred tax assets should not be created. The profit
probability recognition criterion is discussed in Step 6.
Illustration 1C (in continuation to Illustration 1A):
Based on the data from above illustration 1A of H Ltd., calculate temporary differences and
deferred tax. Note from Illustration 1A: Tax rate for 20X7-20X8 is 30%, but the new tax rate of
32% for the year 20X8-20X9 and beyond has already been enacted before the year end.
Solution:
Calculation of Temporary Differences / Deferred Tax
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.38
FINANCIAL REPORTING
*****
1.6.5 Step 5: Identify exceptions
(A) Exception 1: The initial recognition of goodwill in the case of a business combination
In the case of a business combination, when the consideration paid exceeds the net
identifiable assets, goodwill is created.
Technically speaking, goodwill arising in a business combination is measured as the
excess of (a) over (b) below:
(a) the aggregate of:
(b)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the consideration transferred measured in accordance with Ind AS 103,
which generally requires acquisition date fair value;
the amount of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree recognized
in accordance with Ind AS 103; and
in a business combination achieved in stages, the acquisition-date fair
value of the acquirer's previously held equity interest in the acquiree.
the net of the acquisition-date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and
liabilities assumed measured in accordance with Ind AS 103.
As per principles enunciated in this Ind AS 12, the entity has to determine the tax base
of this goodwill to compute the temporary difference, either taxable or deductible, at
the time of recognition and subsequently when impairment takes place. The Standard
provides separate guidance for taxable temporary difference (Situation A) and
deductible temporary difference (Situation B).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.39
Situation A: Where the temporary difference is in the nature of taxable temporary
difference. Again, in this case, the prescribed treatment is different where good will is
not tax deductible (Situation A1) and where it is tax deductible (Situation A2).
(Situation A1: Where it is not tax deductible)
(a)
At the time of initial recognition of goodwill:
(i)
(ii)
Quite a few tax jurisdictions do not permit this goodwill as a tax
deductible expense. Also, the cost of goodwill is often not deductible
when a subsidiary dispose of its underlying business. Put simply, the
tax base of goodwill is Nil. But the entity has a taxable temporary
difference as the goodwill (an asset) has a carrying amount leading to
a deferred tax liability.
The Standard does not permit the recognition of the resulting deferred
tax liability as goodwill is measured as a residual and the recognition
of the deferred tax liability would increase the carrying amount of
goodwill, resulting into a circular type of computation.
Deferred tax liability is not recognised for goodwill since the recognition
shall be done through goodwill itself. This is going to result in inflating
the goodwill amount, and therefore is not permitted.
needs to be created. Now because of recognition of this deferred tax liability,
the following entry needs to be passed instead of the above entry:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.40
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b) Subsequently at the time of impairment, if required, in the carrying amount:
(i)
(ii)
This goodwill as per Ind AS 103 is not amortised though tested for
impairment.
Subsequent reduction in a deferred tax liability that is unrecognised
because it arises from the initial recognition of goodwill is also
regarded as arising from the initial recognition of goodwill and is
therefore not recognised.
Example 36
In the aforesaid Example 35, after 2 years goodwill is tested for impairment
and the entity recognises an impairment loss of 10,000, the amount of the
taxable temporary difference relating to the goodwill is reduced from 35,000
to 25,000, with a resulting decrease in the value of the unrecognised
deferred tax liability. That decrease in the value of the unrecognised deferred
tax liability is also regarded as relating to the initial recognition of the goodwill
and is therefore prohibited from being recognised as per this Ind AS 12.
Situation A2: Where it is tax deductible
In tax jurisdiction, where goodwill is tax deductible, deferred tax liability should be
recognised for the taxable temporary difference.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.41
Situation B: where the difference is in the nature of deductible difference
In all cases, deferred tax asset, subject to recognition criteria discussed in step 6
below, should be recognised.
Summary of Exception 1
No deferred tax liability is to be recognised for taxable temporary difference arising
on goodwill arising in a business combination in tax jurisdictions where such goodwill
is not tax deductible.
In all other cases of temporary difference, either taxable or deferred, either deferred
tax liability or deferred tax asset should be recognised in accordance with other
provisions of this Ind AS.
(B) Exception 2: The initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction which: (i)
is not a business combination; and (ii) at the time of the transaction, affects neither
accounting profit nor taxable profit (tax loss)
The Standard prohibits recognition of deferred tax liability or deferred tax assets in
cases of either taxable or deductible temporary difference arising in a transaction:
(a)
is not a business combination; and
(b)
does not affect neither the accounting profit nor the taxable profit.
As per the Standard, three types of transactions of assets or liabilities could be
anticipated:
Type 1: In the nature of business combination
In such a case, recognise deferred tax liabilities or deferred tax assets on temporary
differences between the carrying amount and respective tax base of assets or
liabilities except on goodwill (in certain circumstances)
Type 2: Where the transaction impacts accounting profit (i.e. statement of
profit or loss) (like sale of goods, recognition of debtors)
In such a case, recognise any deferred tax in statement of profit or loss:
Type 3: Where the transaction is not a business combination & does not impact
accounting profit nor taxable profit, such as purchase of assets or receipt of
government grants.
This exception relates to the transaction of the third type.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.42
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 37
Entity A acquires a foreign made vehicle for
1,00,000 directly from the vehicle
manufacturer. The transaction is not a part of any business combination. The tax laws
do not permit any depreciation thereon. Also, any profits at the time of sale are not
taxable or losses are not tax deductible. This vehicle thus has a tax base of Nil. There
is a taxable temporary difference of  1,00,000. Assuming a tax rate of 30%, the entity
should create a deferred tax liability of 30,000. But the Standard does not permit.
The Standard implies that if the carrying amount of any asset or liability is not equal to
its tax base at the time of its transaction where the transaction is:
(i)
Not in the nature of business combination.
(ii)
Not impacting either the accounting profit or the taxable profit.
(iii)
Not giving rise to equal taxable and deductible temporary differences
Neither deferred tax liability nor deferred tax asset should be recognised.
The following is a brief checklist:
(i)
Is the transaction in the nature of business combination?
(ii)
Whether the transaction impacts accounting profit?
(iii)
Whether the transaction impacts taxable profits?
(iv)
Whether the carrying amount is equal to tax base?
Depending on the answers to the checklist, deferred tax asset or liability needs to be
determined in accordance with the guidance under this exception.
Furthermore, an entity does not recognise subsequent changes in unrecognised
deferred tax liability or asset as the asset is depreciated.
A transaction that is not a business combination may lead to the initial recognition of
an asset and a liability and, at the time of the transaction, affect neither accounting
profit nor taxable profit.
For example, at the commencement date of a lease, a lessee typically recognises a
lease liability and the corresponding amount as part of the cost of a right-of-use asset.
Depending on the applicable tax law, equal taxable and deductible temporary
differences may arise on initial recognition of the asset and liability in such a
transaction. The exemption provided does not apply to such temporary differences and
an entity recognises any resulting deferred tax liability and asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.43
Example 38
Entity X acquired an intangible asset (a license) for 10 Cr that has a life of five years.
The asset will be solely recovered through use. No tax deductions can be claimed, as the
license is amortised or as when the license expires. No tax deductions are available on
disposal. Trading profits from using the license will be taxed at 30%.
The tax base of the asset is nil, because the cost of the intangible asset is not deductible
for tax purposes (either in use or on disposal). A temporary difference of 10 Cr arises;
prima facie a deferred tax liability of 3 Cr should be recognized on this amount. However,
no deferred tax is recognised on the asset's initial recognition. This is because the
temporary difference did not arise from a business combination and did not affect
accounting or taxable profit at the time of the recognition.
The asset will have a carrying amount of 8 Cr at the end of year 1. The entity will pay
tax of 2.40 Cr through recovery of the asset by earning taxable amounts of 8 Cr. The
deferred tax liability is not recognised, because it arises from initial recognition of an asset.
Similarly, no deferred tax is recognised in later periods.
(C) Exception 3: Temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries,
branches and associates, and interests in joint ventures
Temporary differences arise when the carrying amount of investments in subsidiaries,
branches and associates or interests in joint ventures (namely the parent or investor's
share of the net assets of the subsidiary, branch, associate or investee, including the
carrying amount of goodwill) becomes different from the tax base (which is often cost)
of the investment or interest.
Such differences may arise in a number of different circumstances, for example:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the existence of undistributed profits of subsidiaries, branches, associates
and joint ventures;
changes in foreign exchange rates when a parent and its subsidiary are based
in different countries; and
a reduction in the carrying amount of an investment in an associate to its
recoverable amount.
In consolidated financial statements, the temporary difference may be
different from the temporary difference associated with that investment in the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.44
FINANCIAL REPORTING
parent's separate financial statements if the parent carries the investment in
its separate financial statements at cost or revalued amount.
Should an entity recognise a deferred tax liability in these cases? The guiding principle
is:
An entity shall recognise a deferred tax liability for all taxable temporary differences
associated with investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates, and interests
in joint ventures, except to the extent that both of the following conditions are
satisfied:
(i)
(ii)
the parent, investor or venturer is able to control the timing of the reversal of
the temporary difference; and
it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable
future.
Now let us examine where the parent, investor or venture is able to control the timing
of reversal of taxable temporary difference. Generally, the taxable temporary
difference will get reversed on distribution of dividends.
Subsidiary/branches: As a parent controls the dividend policy of its subsidiary, it is
able to control the timing of the reversal of temporary differences associated with that
investment (including the temporary differences arising not only from undistributed
profits but also from any foreign exchange translation differences). Furthermore, it
would often be impracticable to determine the amount of income taxes that would be
payable when the temporary difference reverses. Therefore, when the parent has
determined that those profits will not be distributed in the foreseeable future the parent
does not recognise a deferred tax liability. The same considerations apply to
investments in branches.
Relevant Extracts from Financial Statements of selected Listed Entities are presented
below:
Annual Report of Bharti Airtel Ltd. for the year ending 31 March 2022 (Page 358)
The Group has not recognised deferred tax liability with respect to unremitted retained earnings and associated foreign currency
translation reserve with respect to certain of its subsidiaries and joint ventures where the Group is in a position to control the timing
of the distribution of profits and it is probable that the subsidiaries will not distribute the profits in the foreseeable future. The taxable
temporary difference associated with respect to unremitted retained earnings and associated foreign currency translation reserve
is 98,427 and 79,800 as of March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021, respectively. The distribution of the same is expected to attract
tax in the range of NIL to 20% depending on the tax rates applicable as of March 31, 2022 in the jurisdiction in which the respective
Group entity operates.
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of Bharti Airtel Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.45
The non-monetary assets and liabilities of an entity are measured in its functional
currency (see Ind AS 21, The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates). If the
entity's taxable profit or tax loss (and, hence, the tax base of its non-monetary assets
and liabilities) is determined in a different currency, changes, changes in the exchange
rate give rise to temporary differences that result in a recognised deferred tax liability
or (subject to recognition criteria) asset. The resulting deferred tax is charged or
credited to profit or loss.
Associate: An investor in an associate does not control that entity and is usually not
in a position to determine its dividend policy. Therefore, in the absence of an
agreement requiring that the profits of the associate will not be distributed in the
foreseeable future, an investor recognises a deferred tax liability arising from taxable
temporary differences associated with its investment in the associate. In some cases,
an investor may not be able to determine the amount of tax that would be payable if it
recovers the cost of its investment in an associate, but can determine that it will equal
or exceed a minimum amount. In such cases, the deferred tax liability is measured at
this amount.
Joint Venture: The arrangement between the parties to a joint venture usually deals
with the sharing of the profits and identifies whether decisions on such matters require
the consent of all the venturers or a specified majority of the venturers. When the
venturer can control the sharing of profits and it is probable that the profits will not be
distributed in the foreseeable future, a deferred tax liability is not recognised.
The aforesaid discussion related to recognition of deferred tax liability on taxable
temporary difference. But there could be deductible temporary differences. So what is
the guiding principle for recognition of deferred tax assets on deductible temporary
differences?
The principle is:
An entity shall recognise a deferred tax asset for all deductible temporary differences
arising from investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates, and interests in
joint ventures, to the extent that, and only to the extent that, it is probable that:
(i)
the temporary difference will reverse in the foreseeable future; and
(ii)
taxable profit will be available against which the temporary difference can be
utilised.
Both the conditions have to be satisfied.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.46
FINANCIAL REPORTING
In deciding whether a deferred tax asset is recognised for deductible temporary
differences associated with its investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates,
and its interests in joint ventures, an entity considers the guidance set out in Step 6
below.
1.6.6 Step 6: Assess (also reassess) deductible temporary differences,
tax losses and tax credits
(a)
As we are aware that deductible temporary differences reduce the taxable profits of future
periods. It signifies that future tax payments will be smaller by a particular amount.
However, economic benefits will flow to the entity in the form of lower tax liability in future
only in case it has future profits. If there are no future profits, it means there are no tax
payments which in turn mean that deductible temporary differences are of no benefit.
Illustration 2
The directors of H Ltd. wish to recognise a material deferred tax asset in relation to 250
Cr of unused trading losses which have accumulated as at 31st March 20X1. H Ltd. has
budgeted profits for 80 Cr for the year ended 31st March 20X2. The directors have
forecast that profits will grow by 20% each year thereafter.
However, the market is currently depressed and sales orders are at a lower level for the
first quarter of 20X2 than they were for the same period in any of the previous five years.
On extrapolating the sales order book, it is noted that the improvement in trading results
may occur after the next couple of years to come at the position of breakeven and the
budgeted profits shared by the directors of H Ltd. do not appear to be in line with the sales
order book. H Ltd. operates under a tax jurisdiction which allows for trading losses to be
only carried forward for a maximum of two years.
Analyse whether a deferred tax asset can be recognized in the financial statements of
H Ltd. for the year ended 31st March 20X1?
Solution
In relation to unused trading losses, the carrying amount is zero since the losses have not
yet been recognised in the financial statements of H Ltd. A potential deferred tax asset does
arise but the determination of the tax base is more problematic.
The tax base of an asset is the amount which will be deductible against taxable economic
benefits from recovering the carrying amount of the asset. Where recovery of an asset will
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.47
have no tax consequences, the tax base is equal to the carrying amount. H Ltd. operates
under a tax jurisdiction which only allows losses to be carried forward for two years. The
maximum the tax base could be is therefore equal to the amount of unused losses for years
20X0 and 20X1 since these only are available to be deducted from future profits. The tax
base though needs to be restricted to the extent that there is a probability of sufficient future
profits to offset the trading losses. The directors of H Ltd. should base their forecast of the
future profitability on reasonable and supportable assumptions. There appears to be
evidence that this is not the case.
H Ltd. has accumulated trading losses and there is little evidence that there will be an
improvement in trading results within the next couple of years. The market is depressed
and sales orders for the first quarter of 20X2 are below levels in any of the previous five
years.
The forecast profitability for 20X2 and subsequent growth rate therefore appear to be
unrealistically optimistic.
Given that losses can only be carried forward for a maximum of two years, it is unlikely that
any deferred tax asset should be recognised.
Hence, the contention of directors to recognized deferred tax assets in relation to
250 crores is not correct.
*****
Example 39
Entity A has deductible temporary difference of  1,00,000 for the financial year ended
31st March, 20X1. It anticipates a future profit of₹3,00,000 in next year against which the
said deductible temporary differences could be set off. The tax rate is 30%. Thus, in future
the entity will pay tax on 2,00,000 (₹3,00,000   1,00,000). The tax liability is 60,000
@30% tax rate.
Had there been no deductible temporary difference, the tax liability would be₹90,000
@30% on 3,00,000. Thus, there is an inflow of economic benefit of 30,000 through a
lower cash outflow.
However, if there is no probability of taxable profits in future, the entity is not able to derive
any economic benefit (by way of lower cash outflow in future) because of the existing of
deductible temporary difference.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.48
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
An entity should recognise deferred tax assets only when it is probable that taxable profits
will be available against which the deductible temporary differences can be utilised. This
is based on the principle of prudence and conservatism. It should be noted that the entity
has to make sufficient taxable profits in future. Not making losses will not suffice.
If tax law does not impose any restrictions on sources of taxable profits against which it
may make deductions on the reversal of that deductible temporary difference, an entity
assesses a deductible temporary difference in combination with all of its other deductible
temporary differences.
If tax law restricts the utilisation of losses to deduction against income of a specific type, a
deductible temporary difference is assessed in combination only with other deductible
temporary differences.
Probable means more likely than not. The Standard provides a three step criteria to be
applied in a serial order. The criterion is applied in the case of the same taxable entity
assessed by the same taxation authority.
Criteria No. 1: Existence of taxable temporary differences
The entity at the balance sheet should see whether there are sufficient taxable temporary
differences whose reversal pattern matches with the reversal profile of deductible temporary
differences.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.49
The entity can recognise deferred tax assets for the entire deductible temporary
differences.
Example 40
As at 31st March, 20X1, an entity has both taxable temporary differences and deductible
temporary difference with the following reversal pattern. Deductible temporary differences
The entity can recognize deferred tax assets for the deductible temporary differences up to
 7,000 ( 4,000 for year 1 & ₹3,000 for year 2) as a taxable temporary difference of that
amount is available.
Criteria No. 2: Probability of future profits
The entity has to apply probability criteria on its future profitability. If it is probable that there
will be sufficient taxable profits, then to the extent of available profits, deductible temporary
differences should be applied for recognition of deferred tax assets.
Examples 41-43
41. If in the aforesaid example 40, the entity expects a profit of 750 in year 2, then
deferred tax asset should be created on  7,750 $(\mathbb{r}4,000+\mathbb{\times}3,000+\mathbb{\times}750)$.
However, taxable profits arising in future from future origination of deductible
temporary differences should not be considered as deductible temporary differences
will require future taxable profits for utilisation.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.50
FINANCIAL REPORTING
42. An entity has unutilised deductible temporary difference of 1,000 at the end of year
1 that is going to be reversed in the year 2. In year 2, taxable profits are computed
because of tax disallowances of unpaid statutory liabilities of 1,000 which can be
claimed as deduction only in year 3, if paid, but cannot be carried forward. The
entity expects nil taxable profit in year 3. In this case, no deferred tax asset will be
created.
43. An entity has unutilised deductible temporary difference of  1,000 at the end of year
1 that is going to be reversed in the year 2. In year 2, taxable profits are computed
because of tax disallowances of unpaid statutory liabilities of  1,000 which can be
claimed as deduction only in year 3, if paid, but cannot be carried forward. The
entity expects taxable profit of 450 in year 3. In this case, deferred tax asset will
be created at appropriate rate on deductible temporary difference of  450 only.
Criteria No. 3: Availability of tax planning opportunities
If even after applying criteria no. 2, still there are unrecognised deductible temporary
differences, the entity endeavour to see whether any tax planning opportunities are
available.
Tax planning opportunities are actions that the entity would take in order to create or
increase taxable income in a particular period before the expiry of a tax loss or tax credit
carry forward.
For example, in some jurisdictions, taxable profit may be created or increased by:
(i)
electing to have interest income taxed on either a received or receivable basis;
(ii)
deferring the claim for certain deductions from taxable profit;
(iii)
(iv)
selling, and perhaps leasing back, assets that have appreciated but for which the tax
base has not been adjusted to reflect such appreciation; and
selling an asset that generates non-taxable income (such as, in some jurisdictions, a
government bond) in order to purchase another investment that generates taxable
income.
Where tax planning opportunities advance taxable profit from a later period to an
earlier period, the utilisation of a tax loss or tax credit carry forward still depends on
the existence of future taxable profit from sources other than future originating
temporary differences.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.51
(f)
Unused tax losses and unused tax credits:
A deferred tax asset shall be recognised for the carry forward of unused tax losses
and unused tax credits to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be
available against which the unused tax losses and unused tax credits can be utilised.
The criteria for recognising deferred tax assets arising from the carry forward of
unused tax losses and tax credits are the same as the criteria for recognising deferred
tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences. However, the existence of
unused tax losses is strong evidence that future taxable profit may not be available.
Therefore, when an entity has a history of recent losses, the entity recognises a
deferred tax asset arising from unused tax losses or tax credits only to the extent that
the entity has sufficient taxable temporary differences or there is convincing other
evidence that sufficient taxable profit will be available against which the unused tax
losses or unused tax credits can be utilised by the entity. In such circumstances,
paragraph 82 of Ind AS 12 requires disclosure of the amount of the deferred tax asset
and the nature of the evidence supporting its recognition.
(g) When an entity has a history of recent losses, the entity should consider the following
guidance:
The criteria for recognising deferred tax assets arising from the carry forward of
unused tax losses and tax credits are the same as the criteria for recognising deferred
tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences.
However, the existence of unused tax losses is strong evidence that future taxable
profit may not be available. Therefore, when an entity has a history of recent losses,
the entity recognises a deferred tax asset arising from unused tax losses or tax credits
only to the extent that the entity has sufficient taxable temporary differences or there
is convincing other evidence that sufficient taxable profit will be available against which
the unused tax losses or unused tax credits can be utilised by the entity.
In such circumstances, this Ind AS requires disclosure of the amount of the deferred
tax asset and the nature of the evidence supporting its recognition.
To assess the probability that taxable profit will be available against which the unused
tax losses or unused tax credits can be utilised, the entity should consider the
following:
(i) whether the entity has sufficient taxable temporary differences relating to the
same taxation authority and the same taxable entity, which will result in
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.52
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(h)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
taxable amounts against which the unused tax losses or unused tax credits
can be utilised before they expire;
whether it is probable that the entity will have taxable profits before the
unused tax losses or unused tax credits expire;
whether the unused tax losses result from identifiable causes which are
unlikely to recur; and
whether tax planning opportunities are available to the entity that will create
taxable profit in the period in which the unused tax losses or unused tax
credits can be utilised.
To the extent that it is not probable that taxable profit will be available against which
the unused tax losses or unused tax credits can be utilised, the deferred tax asset is
not to be recognised.
Reassessment of unrecognised Deferred Tax Assets:
At the end of each reporting period, the entity should reassess unrecognised deferred
tax assets. It may need to recognise a previously unrecognised deferred tax asset to
the extent it has now become probable that future taxable profits will be available for
deferred tax assets to be recovered. For example, improvement in trading conditions
may make it probable for an entity to generate sufficient taxable profits in future years
to enable it to meet the recognition criteria laid down above.
(i) Uncertainty over income tax treatment
In assessing whether and how an uncertain tax treatment affects the determination of
taxable profit (tax loss), tax bases, unused tax losses, unused tax credits and tax rates,
an entity shall assume that a taxation authority will examine amounts it has a right to
examine and have full knowledge of all related information when making those
examinations.
If an entity concludes it is probable that the taxation authority will accept an uncertain
tax treatment, the entity shall determine the taxable profit (tax loss), tax bases, unused
tax losses, unused tax credits or tax rates consistently with the tax treatment used or
planned to be used in its income tax filings.
If an entity concludes it is not probable that the taxation authority will accept an
uncertain tax treatment, the entity shall reflect the effect of uncertainty in determining
the related taxable profit (tax loss), tax bases, unused tax losses, unused tax credits
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.53
or tax rates. An entity shall reflect the effect of uncertainty for each uncertain tax
treatment by using either of the following methods, depending on which method the
entity expects to better predict the resolution of the uncertainty:
(a) The most likely amount-the single most likely amount in a range of possible
outcomes. The most likely amount may better predict the resolution of the
uncertainty if the possible outcomes are binary or are concentrated on one
value.
(b)
The expected value-the sum of the probability-weighted amounts in a range
of possible outcomes. The expected value may better predict the resolution
of the uncertainty if there is a range of possible outcomes that are neither
binary nor concentrated on one value.
If an uncertain tax treatment affects current tax and deferred tax (for example, if it
affects both taxable profit used to determine current tax and tax bases used to
determine deferred tax), an entity shall make consistent judgements and estimates for
both current tax and deferred tax.
Comparison to AS 22:
Para 15: Except in the situations stated in paragraph 17, deferred tax assets should be recognised
and carried forward only to the extent that there is a reasonable certainty that sufficient future
taxable income will be available against which such deferred tax assets can be realised.
Para 16: While recognising the tax effect of timing differences, consideration of prudence cannot
be ignored. Therefore, deferred tax assets are recognised and carried forward only to the extent
that there is a reasonable certainty of their realisation. This reasonable level of certainty would
normally be achieved by examining the past record of the enterprise and by making realistic
estimates of profits for the future.
Para 17: Where an enterprise has unabsorbed depreciation or carry forward of losses under tax
laws, deferred tax assets should be recognised only to the extent that there is virtual certainty
supported by convincing evidence that sufficient future taxable income will be available against
which such deferred tax assets can be realised.
Ind AS 12 and AS 22 both require exercise of prudence while recognizing deferred tax assets.
However, AS 22 emphasizes on virtual certainty supported by convincing evidence for recognizing
deferred tax asset, whereas Ind AS 12 requires only probable existence of taxable profit against
which deductible temporary differences can be utilized. Thus, the requirement of recognizing
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.54
FINANCIAL REPORTING
deferred tax asset under AS 22 is very strict (virtual certainty moves towards more than 95%
certainty through evidence such as a strong order book for the future, firm orders in hand etc.),
whereas under Ind AS 12, the same is more realistic focusing only on probable existence of
taxable profits. Ind AS 12 moves to exercise caution only in case of unused tax losses, where it
specifies that deferred tax asset arising from unused tax losses or tax credits can be recognized
only to the extent that the entity has sufficient taxable temporary differences or there is convincing
other evidence that sufficient taxable profit will be available against which the unused tax losses
or unused tax credits can be utilised by the entity.
1.6.7 Step 7: Determine the tax rate (law)
(a) Having determined the taxable temporary differences and deductible temporary difference
that needs to be considered for recognition of deferred tax liabilities or assets respectively,
we now need to determine the tax for creation to deferred tax liabilities or assets. The
principal is:
(b)
Deferred tax assets and liabilities shall be measured:
(i)
(ii)
at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or
the liability is settled;
based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted by
the end of the reporting period.
We have already discussed above the meaning of 'enacted' or 'substantively enacted'.
The same discussion applies here also. But another key word that needs to be understood
in the principle is 'expected to apply'. Since, we are dealing in the future and future is
uncertain, we have to measure this uncertainty. This leads to application of judgment. The
tax rates or the tax laws that will apply in future depends on various factors such as manner
of recovery of asset or settlement of liability, levels of income, distribution of profits among
others. These are now discussed below.
It should however be remembered that the measurement of deferred tax liabilities and
deferred tax assets shall reflect the tax consequences that would follow from the manner in
which the entity expects, at the end of the reporting period, to recover or settle the carrying
amount of its assets and liabilities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.55
(c) Manner of recovery of asset or settlement of liability:
In some jurisdictions, the manner in which an entity recovers (settles) the carrying
amount of an asset (liability) may affect either or both of (a) the tax rate applicable
when the entity recovers (settles) the carrying amount of the asset (liability); and (b)
the tax base of the asset (liability). In such cases, an entity measures deferred tax
liabilities and deferred tax assets using the tax rate and the tax base that are consistent
with the expected manner of recovery or settlement.
Examples 44 & 45
44. An asset has a carrying amount of 100 and a tax base of
60. A tax rate of 20%
would apply if the asset was sold and a tax rate of 30
%
would apply to other
income.
The entity recognises a deferred tax liability of 8 ( 40 at
20%) if it expects to
sell the asset without further use or a deferred tax liability of 12 ( 40 at 30%) if
it expects to retain the asset and recover its carrying amount through use.
45. An asset with a cost of 100 and a carrying amount of 80 is revalued to 150.
No equivalent adjustment is made for tax purposes. Accumulated depreciation for
tax purposes is 30 and the tax rate is 30%. If the asset's sale proceeds exceeds
the cost ( 100), a gain of only 30 (being the cumulative tax depreciation of
30 claimed) will be included in taxable income but sale proceeds in excess of
cost (100) will not be taxable.
The tax base of the asset is 70 and there is a taxable temporary difference of
 80 (150 the revalued amount is the carrying amount).
If the entity expects to recover the carrying amount by using the asset, it must
generate taxable income of 150, but will only be able to deduct depreciation of
70. On this basis, there is a deferred tax liability of 24 (80 at 30%).
If the entity expects to recover the carrying amount by selling the asset immediately
for proceeds of 150, the deferred tax liability is computed as follows:
(i) Sale proceeds
(ii)
Sale proceeds in excess of cost (100)
(iii)
Taxable proceeds
(iv)
Tax base
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
150
₹
50
 100
 70
7.56
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(d)
(e)
Thus, the measurement of deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets shall reflect
the tax consequences that would follow from the manner in which the entity expects,
at the end of the reporting period, to recover or settle the carrying amount of its assets
and liabilities.
However, an issue may arise as to how to interpret the term 'recovery' in relation to
an asset that is not depreciated (non-depreciable asset) and is revalued in accordance
with paragraph 31 (revaluation model) of Ind AS 16.
The accounting principle in this case is as under:
*
*
The deferred tax liability or asset that arises from the revaluation of a non-
depreciable asset in accordance with paragraph 31 of Ind AS 16 shall be
measured on the basis of the tax consequences that would follow from recovery
of the carrying amount of that asset through sale, regardless of the basis of
measuring the carrying amount of that asset.
Accordingly, if the tax law specifies a tax rate applicable to the taxable amount
derived from the sale of an asset that differs from the tax rate applicable to the
taxable amount derived from using an asset, the former rate (tax rate applicable
to the taxable amount derived from the sale of an asset) is applied in measuring
the deferred tax liability or asset related to a non-depreciable asset.
Levels of taxable income:
When different tax rates apply to different levels of taxable income, deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using the average rates that are expected to apply to the taxable
profit (tax loss) of the periods in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
Distribution of dividends:
In some jurisdictions, income taxes are payable at a higher or lower rate if part or all of the
net profit or retained earnings is paid out as a dividend to shareholders of the entity. In some
other jurisdictions, income taxes may be refundable or payable if part or all of the net profit
or retained earnings is paid out as a dividend to shareholders of the entity. In these
circumstances, current and deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rate
applicable to undistributed profits.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.57
Example 46
The following example deals with the measurement of current and deferred tax assets and
liabilities for an entity in a jurisdiction where income taxes are payable at a higher rate on
undistributed profits (50%) with an amount being refundable when profits are distributed.
The tax rate on distributed profits is 35%. At the end of the reporting period, 31st December,
20X1, the entity does not recognise a liability for dividends proposed or declared after the
reporting period. As a result, no dividends are recognised in the year 20X1. Taxable income
for 20X1 is 1,00,000. The net taxable temporary difference for the year 20X1 is  40,000.
The entity recognises a current tax liability and a current income tax expense of  50,000.
No asset is recognised for the amount potentially recoverable as a result of future dividends.
The entity also recognises a deferred tax liability and deferred tax expense of  20,000
(*40,000 at 50%) representing the income taxes that the entity will pay when it recovers or
settles the carrying amounts of its assets and liabilities based on the tax rate applicable to
undistributed profits.
Subsequently, on 15th March, 20X2 the entity recognises dividends of 10,000 from previous
operating profits as a liability.
On 15th March, 20X2, the entity recognises the recovery of income taxes of 1,500 (15% of
the dividends recognised as a liability) as a current tax asset and as a reduction of current
income tax expense for 20X2.
1.6.8 Step 8: Calculate and recognise deferred tax
(a) This is the simplest of all steps. Having determined the taxable temporary differences and
(b)
the deductible temporary differences as per Step 6 and the applicable tax rates with
reference to tax laws, one has to multiply amount determined in Step 6 with the rates
determined in Step 7.
Taxable temporary differences when multiplied with tax rates will lead to deferred tax
liabilities.
Deductible temporary differences when multiplied with rates will lead to deferred tax
assets.
The following should be kept in mind:
Deferred tax liabilities or assets should not be discounted.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.58
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The carrying amount of a deferred tax asset shall be reviewed at the end of each
reporting period.
An entity shall reduce the carrying amount of a deferred tax asset to the extent that it
is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow the benefit
of part or all of that deferred tax asset to be utilised.
Any such reduction shall be reversed to the extent that it becomes probable that
sufficient taxable profit will be available.
1.6.9 Step 9: Accounting of deferred tax
(a)
(b)
The accounting of deferred tax effects of a transaction of an event is consistent with the
accounting for that transaction or event.
A transaction and the deferred tax effects of a transaction may be accounted for in:
Statement of profit and loss;
Outside profit and loss account:
(i)
(ii)
In other comprehensive income such as revaluation amount in accordance
with Ind AS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment
Directly in equity such as correction of an error in accordance with Ind AS 8,
Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors.
(c) However, the carrying amount of deferred tax assets and liabilities may change even
though there is no change in the amount of the related temporary differences.
(d)
This can result, for example, from:
a change in tax rates or tax laws;
a reassessment of the recoverability of deferred tax assets; or
a change in the expected manner of recovery of an asset.
In such cases, the resulting deferred tax is recognised in profit or loss, except to the
extent that it relates to items previously recognised outside profit or loss.
In exceptional circumstances, it may be difficult to determine the amount of current and
deferred tax that relates to items recognised outside profit or loss (either in other
comprehensive income or directly in equity).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.59
(e)
(f)
(g)
This may be the case, for example, when a change in the tax rate or other tax rules
affects a deferred tax asset or liability relating (in whole or in part) to an item that was
previously recognised outside profit or loss; or
In such cases, the current and deferred tax related to items that are recognised outside
profit or loss are based on a reasonable pro rata allocation of the current and deferred
tax of the entity in the tax jurisdiction concerned, or other method that achieves a more
appropriate allocation in the circumstances.
Ind AS 16 does not specify whether an entity should transfer each year from revaluation
surplus to retained earnings an amount equal to the difference between the depreciation or
amortisation on a revalued asset and the depreciation or amortisation based on the cost of
that asset.
If an entity makes such a transfer, the amount transferred is net of any related deferred
tax.
Similar considerations apply to transfers made on disposal of an item of property, plant
or equipment.
When an asset is revalued for tax purposes and that revaluation is related to an accounting
revaluation of an earlier period, or to one that is expected to be carried out in a future
period, the tax effects of both the asset revaluation and the adjustment of the tax base are
recognised in other comprehensive income in the periods in which they occur.
When an entity pays dividends to its shareholders, it may be required to pay a portion of
the dividends to taxation authorities on behalf of shareholders. In many jurisdictions this
amount is referred to as a withholding tax. Such an amount paid or payable to taxation
authorities is charged to equity as a part of the dividends.
1.6.10 Step 10: Offsetting deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities
(a) An entity shall offset deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities if, and only if:
>
the entity has a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current
tax liabilities; and
the deferred tax assets and the deferred tax liabilities relate to income taxes levied by
the same taxation authority on either:
(i)
the same taxable entity; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.60
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
(ii) different taxable entities which intend either to settle current tax liabilities and
assets on a net basis, or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities
simultaneously, in each future period in which significant amounts of deferred
tax liabilities or assets are expected to be settled or recovered.
To avoid the need for detailed scheduling of the timing of the reversal of each temporary
difference, this Standard requires an entity to set off a deferred tax asset against a deferred
tax liability of the same taxable entity if, and only if, they relate to income taxes levied by
the same taxation authority and the entity has a legally enforceable right to set off current
tax assets against current tax liabilities.
In rare circumstances, an entity may have a legally enforceable right of set off, and an
intention to settle net, for some periods but not for others. In such rare circumstances,
detailed scheduling may be required to establish reliably whether the deferred tax liability
of one taxable entity will result in increased tax payments in the same period in which a
deferred tax asset of another taxable entity will result in decreased payments by that
second taxable entity.
Illustration 3
On 1st April 20X1, S Ltd. leased a machine over a 5 year period. The present value of lease
liability is 120 Cr (discount rate of 8%) and is recognized as lease liability and corresponding
Right of Use (RoU) Asset on the same date. The RoU Asset is depreciated under straight line
method over the 5 years. The annual lease rentals are 30 Cr payable starting 31st March 20X2.
The tax law permits tax deduction on the basis of payment of rent.
Assuming tax rate of 30%, you are required to explain the deferred tax consequences for the
above transaction for the year ended 31st March 20X2.
Solution
A temporary difference effectively arises between the value of the machine for accounting
purposes and the amount of lease liability, since the rent payment is eligible for tax deduction.
Tax base of the machine is nil as the amount is not eligible for deduction for tax purposes.
Tax base of the lease liability is nil as it is measured at carrying amount less any future tax
deductible amount
Recognition of deferred tax on 31st March 20X2:
Carrying amount in balance sheet
RoU Asset [120 Cr - 24 Cr (Depreciation)]
96.00 Dr
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.61
*****
1.7 PART D: PRACTICAL APPLICATION
1.7.1 Deferred tax arising from a business combination
(a) As discussed above, temporary differences may arise in a business combination. In
accordance with Ind AS 103, an entity recognises any resulting deferred tax assets (to the
extent that they meet the recognition criteria) or deferred tax liabilities as identifiable assets
and liabilities at the acquisition date. Consequently, those deferred tax assets and deferred
tax liabilities affect the amount of goodwill or the bargain purchase gain the entity
recognises. However, in accordance with this Ind AS, in certain circumstances, an entity
does not recognise deferred tax liabilities arising from the initial recognition of goodwill.
Illustration 4
On 1st April 20X1, A Ltd. acquired 12 Cr shares (representing 80% stake) in B Ltd. by means
of a cash payment of 25 Cr. It is the group policy to value the non-controlling interest in
subsidiaries at the date of acquisition at fair value. The market value of an equity share in
B Ltd. at 1st April 20X1 can be used for this purpose. On 1st April 20X1, the market value
of a B Ltd. share was  2.00
On 1st April 20X1, the individual financial statements of B Ltd. showed the net assets at
23 Cr.
The directors of A Ltd. carried out a fair value exercise to measure the identifiable assets
and liabilities of B Ltd. at 1st April 20X1. The following matters emerged:
Property having a carrying value of 15 Cr at 1st April 20X1 had an estimated market
value of 18 Cr at that date.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.62
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Plant and equipment having a carrying value of 11 Cr at 1st April 20X1 had an
estimated market value of 13 Cr at that date.
Inventory in the books of B Ltd. is shown at a cost of 2.50 Cr. The fair value of
the inventory on the acquisition date is 3 Cr.
The fair value adjustments have not been reflected in the individual financial statements of
B Ltd. In the consolidated financial statements, the fair value adjustments will be regarded
as temporary differences for the purposes of computing deferred tax. The rate of deferred
tax to apply to temporary differences is 20%.
Assume that the current book value (prior to fair valuation exercise under Ind AS 103)
equals the tax base.
Calculate the deferred tax impact on above and calculate the goodwill arising on acquisition
of B Ltd.
Solution
Computation of Net Assets of B Ltd.
As per books
23.00 Cr
Add: Fair value differences not recognized in books of B Ltd.:
Property (18 Cr – 15 Cr)
3.00 Cr
Plant and Equipment $(13~Cr-11~Cr)$
2.00 Cr
Inventory (3 Cr– 2.5 Cr)
 0.50 Cr
28.5 Cr
Less: Deferred tax liability on fair value difference @ 20%
$[(3~Cr+2~Cr+0.50~Cr)\times20\%]$
Total Net Assets at Fair Value
Computation of Goodwill:
Purchase Consideration
Add: Non-Controlling Interest $[\{(12~Cr\times(20\%/80\%)\}\times\mp2$ per share]
Less: Net Assets at Fair Value
Goodwill on acquisition date
(1.10 Cr)
27.40 Cr
 25.00 Cr
6.00 Cr
31.00 Cr
(27.40 Cr)
3.60 Cr
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.63
(b)
(c)
As a result of a business combination, the probability of realising a pre-acquisition deferred
tax asset of the acquirer could change. An acquirer may consider it probable that it will
recover its own deferred tax asset that was not recognised before the business
combination. For example, the acquirer may be able to utilise the benefit of its unused tax
losses against the future taxable profit of the acquiree. Alternatively, as a result of the
business combination it might no longer be probable that future taxable profit will allow the
deferred tax asset to be recovered. In such cases, the acquirer recognises a change in the
deferred tax asset in the period of the business combination but does not include it as part
of the accounting for the business combination. Therefore, the acquirer does not take it into
account in measuring the goodwill or bargain purchase gain it recognises in the business
combination.
The potential benefit of the acquiree's income tax loss carry forwards or other deferred tax
assets might not satisfy the criteria for separate recognition when a business combination
is initially accounted for but might be realised subsequently. An entity shall recognise
acquired deferred tax benefits that it realises after the business combination as follows:
Acquired deferred tax benefits recognised within the measurement period that result
from new information about facts and circumstances that existed at the acquisition
date shall be applied to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill related to that
acquisition. If the carrying amount of that goodwill is zero, any remaining deferred tax
benefits shall be recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in equity
as capital reserve or recognised directly in capital reserve, depending on whether
paragraph 34 or paragraph 36A of Ind AS 103 would have applied had the
measurement period adjustments been known on the date of acquisition itself.
All other acquired deferred tax benefits realised shall be recognised in profit or loss
(or, if this Standard so requires, outside profit or loss).
1.7.2 Current and deferred tax arising from share-based payment
transactions
(a)
In some tax jurisdictions, an entity receives a tax deduction (i.e., an amount that is
deductible in determining taxable profit) that relates to remuneration paid in shares, share
options or other equity instruments of the entity. The amount of that tax deduction may
differ from the related cumulative remuneration expense and may arise in a later accounting
period. For example, in some jurisdictions, an entity may recognise an expense for the
consumption of employee services received as consideration for share options granted, in
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.64
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
accordance with Ind AS 102, Share- based Payment, and not receive a tax deduction until
the share options are exercised, with the measurement of the tax deduction based on the
entity's share price at the date of exercise.
As with the preliminary expenses, the difference between the tax base of the employee
services received to date (being the amount permitted as a deduction in future periods
under taxation laws), and the carrying amount of nil, is a deductible temporary difference
that results in a deferred tax asset. If the amount permitted as a deduction in future periods
under taxation laws is not known at the end of the period, it shall be estimated, based on
information available at the end of the period. For example, if the amount permitted as a
deduction in future periods under taxation laws is dependent upon the entity's share price
at a future date, the measurement of the deductible temporary difference should be based
on the entity's share price at the end of the period.
As noted above, in (a), the amount of the tax deduction or estimated future tax deduction,
measured in accordance with paragraph (b) above may differ from the related cumulative
remuneration expense. This Standard requires that current and deferred tax should be
recognised as income or an expense and included in profit or loss for the period, except to
the extent that the tax arises from (a) a transaction or event that is recognised, in the same
or a different period, outside profit or loss, or (b) a business combination. If the amount of
the tax deduction (or estimated future tax deduction) exceeds the amount of the related
cumulative remuneration expense, this indicates that the tax deduction relates not only to
remuneration expense but also to an equity item. In this situation, the excess of the
associated current or deferred tax should be recognised directly in equity.
Illustration 5
On 1st April 20X1, P Ltd. had granted 1 Cr share options worth 4 Cr (fair value) subject to a two-
year vesting period. The income tax law permits a tax deduction at the exercise date of the
intrinsic value of the options. The intrinsic value of the options at 31st March 20X2 was 1.60 Cr
and at 31st March 20X3 was 4.60 Cr. The increase in the fair value of the options on 31st March
20X3 was not foreseeable at 31st March 20X2. The options were exercised at 31st March 20X3.
Give the accounting for the above transaction for deferred tax for period ending 31st March, 20X2
and 31st March, 20X3. Assume that there are sufficient taxable profits available in future against
any deferred tax assets. Tax rate of 30% is applicable to P Ltd.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.65
Solution:
On $31^{st}$ March 20X2:
The tax benefit is calculated as under:
(Being DTA recognized on equity option)
On $31^{st}$ March 20X3:
The options have been exercised and a current tax benefit will be available to the entity on the
basis of intrinsic value of 4.60 Cr. Initially recognized deferred tax asset will no longer be
required.
The accounting entry will be done as under:
Tax Expense
To Deferred Tax Asset
(Being DTA reversed on the exercise of the option)
*****
Dr
0.24 Cr
0.24 Cr
1.7.3 Change in tax status of an entity or its shareholders
(a)
A change in the tax status of an entity or of its shareholders may have consequences for
an entity by increasing or decreasing its tax liabilities or assets. This may, for example,
occur upon the public listing of an entity's equity instruments or upon the restructuring of
an entity's equity. It may also occur upon a controlling shareholder's move to a foreign
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.66
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
(d)
country. As a result of such an event, an entity may be taxed differently; it may for example
gain or lose tax incentives or become subject to a different rate of tax in the future.
A change in the tax status of an entity or its shareholders may have an immediate effect
on the entity's current tax liabilities or assets. The change may also increase or decrease
the deferred tax liabilities and assets recognised by the entity, depending on the effect the
change in tax status has on the tax consequences that will arise from recovering or settling
the carrying amount of the entity's assets and liabilities.
The issue is how an entity should account for the tax consequences of a change in its tax
status or that of its shareholders.
The accounting principles that should be adopted in this situation are as under:
1.8
A change in the tax status of an entity or its shareholders does not give rise to
increases or decreases in amounts recognised outside profit or loss.
The current and deferred tax consequences of a change in tax status shall be included
in profit or loss for the period,
*
*
unless those consequences relate to transactions and events that result,
in the same or a different period,
in a direct credit or charge to the recognised amount of equity or in amounts
recognised in other comprehensive income.
Those tax consequences that relate to changes in the recognised amount of equity, in
the same or a different period (not included in profit or loss), shall be charged or
credited directly to equity.
Those tax consequences that relate to amounts recognised in other comprehensive
income shall be recognised in other comprehensive income.
PART E: DISCLOSURES
This Ind AS not only deals with recognition and measurement of income-taxes but also requires
quite a few disclosures with respect to these income tax. These are discussed as under.
1.8.1 Disclosure 1: Disclose components of tax expenses (income)
(a) Each of the major components of tax expense (income) is to be disclosed separately.
(b) As we know, tax expense (tax income) is the aggregate amount included in the
determination of profit or loss for the period in respect of current tax and deferred tax. The
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.67
(c)
tax expense (income) related to profit or loss or loss from ordinary activities shall be
presented in statement of profit or loss.
The components of tax expense (income) include:
current tax expense (income);
any adjustments recognised in the period for current tax of prior periods;
the amount of deferred tax expense (income) relating to the origination and reversal
of temporary differences;
the amount of deferred tax expense (income) relating to changes in tax rates or the
imposition of new taxes;
the amount of the benefit arising from a previously unrecognised tax loss, tax credit or
temporary difference of a prior period that is used to reduce current tax expense;
the amount of the benefit from a previously unrecognised tax loss, tax credit or
temporary difference of a prior period that is used to reduce deferred tax expense;
deferred tax expense arising from the write-down, or reversal of a previous write-down,
of a deferred tax asset; and
the amount of tax expense (income) relating to those changes in accounting policies
and errors that are included in profit or loss in accordance with Ind AS 8, because they
cannot be accounted for retrospectively.
1.8.2 Disclosure 2: Tax related to items charged directly to equity
(a)
(b)
(c)
Indian Accounting Standards require or permit particular items to be credited or charged
directly to equity.
Examples of such items are:
an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings resulting from either a
change in accounting policy that is applied retrospectively or the correction of an error
(see Ind AS 8, Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors); and
amounts arising on initial recognition of the equity component of a compound financial
instrument (see paragraph 23).
The current and deferred tax relating to these items have to be recognised and accounted
for directly in equity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.68
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(d)
This Ind AS requires disclosure of the aggregate current and deferred tax relating to items
that are charged or credited directly to equity.
1.8.3 Disclosure 3: Tax related to items recognised in statement of other
comprehensive income
(a)
(b)
Indian Accounting Standards require or permit particular items to be recognised in other
comprehensive income.
Examples of such items are:
(c)
(d)
a change in carrying amount arising from the revaluation of property, plant and
equipment (see Ind AS 16); and
exchange differences arising on the translation of the financial statements of a foreign
operation (see Ind AS 21).
The current and deferred tax relating to these items have to be recognised and accounted
for in the statement of other comprehensive income.
This Ind AS requires disclosure of the amount of income tax relating to each component of
other comprehensive income.
1.8.4 Disclosure 4: Explanation of the relationship between tax expense
(income) and accounting profit
(a)
(b)
In ideal situation, if accounting profit is say 100 and tax rate is 30%, the tax expense
should be 30. But this is seldom the case due to differences in accounting principles and
standards vis-a-vis tax laws.
Therefore, this Standard requires an explanation to be disclosed of the relationship
between tax expense (income) and accounting profit in either or both of the following forms:
a numerical reconciliation between tax expense (income) and the product of
accounting profit multiplied by the applicable tax rate(s), disclosing also the basis on
which the applicable tax rate(s) is (are) computed; or
a numerical reconciliation between the average effective tax rate (tax expense divided
by the accounting profit) and the applicable tax rate, disclosing also the basis on which
the applicable tax rate is computed.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.69
Example 47
An entity has made an accounting profit of 1,00,000. The tax rate is 30%. In
(c) These disclosures enable users of financial statements to understand whether the
relationship between tax expense (income) and accounting profit is unusual and to
understand the significant factors that could affect that relationship in the future. The
relationship between tax expense (income) and accounting profit may be affected by such
factors as revenue that is exempt from taxation, expenses that are not deductible in
determining taxable profit (tax loss), the effect of tax losses and the effect of foreign tax
rates.
(d)
In explaining the relationship between tax expense (income) and accounting profit, an entity
uses an applicable tax rate that provides the most meaningful information to the users of
its financial statements. Often, the most meaningful rate is the domestic rate of tax in the
country in which the entity is domiciled, aggregating the tax rate applied for national taxes
with the rates applied for any local taxes which are computed on a substantially similar
level of taxable profit (tax loss).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.70
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Relevant Extracts from Financial Statements of selected Listed Entities are presented below:
1.
Annual Report of Reliance Industries Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2022
(Page 335):
* Refer Note 32
(Source Annual report for 2021-2022 of Reliance Industries Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.71
Annual Report of Hindustan Unilever Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2022
(Page 160)
B.
Reconciliation of Effective Tax Rate
The reconciliation between the statutory income tax rate applicable to the Company and the effective income tax
rate of the Company is as follows:
 Others include prior period adjustment tax refunds and tax on exceptional items.
3.
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of Hindustan Unilever Ltd.)
Annual Report of Larsen & Toubro Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2022 (Page 438)
[NOTE 44]
Disclosure pursuant to Ind AS 12 "Income Taxes": (contd.)
(b) Reconciliation of tax expense and the accounting profit multiplied by domestic tax rate applicable in India:
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of Larsen & Toubro Ltd.)
4.
Annual Report of SpiceJet Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2022 (Page 110)
52. Income tax expense
Reconciliation of tax expense and the accounting profit multiplied by India's domestic tax rate for March 31, 2022 and
March 31, 2021:
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of SpiceJet Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.72
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(e) However, for an entity operating in several jurisdictions, it may be more meaningful to
aggregate separate reconciliations prepared using the domestic rate in each individual
jurisdiction. The following example illustrates how the selection of the applicable tax rate
affects the presentation of the numerical reconciliation.
Example 48
In 20X2, an entity has accounting profit in its own jurisdiction (country A) of 1,500 (20X1:
2,000) and in country B of 1,500 (20X1:₹ 500). The tax rate is 30% in country A and
100 (20X1:  200) are not deductible for tax
20% in country B. In country A, expenses of
purposes.
The following reconciliation will be prepared:
Relevant Extracts from Financial Statements of selected Listed Entities are presented below:
Annual Report of Bharti Airtel Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2022 (Page 357):
The impact of different tax rates is disclosed separately in Consolidated Financial Statements
whose extract is given below [10th line item with amounts of 2,594 and (13,887)]:
The reconciliation between the amount computed by applying the statutory income tax rate to the loss before tax and the income
tax charge is summarised below:
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of Bharti Airtel Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.73
Illustration 6
A Ltd.'s profit before tax according to Ind AS for Year 20X1-20X2 is  100 thousand and taxable
profit for year 20X1-20X2 is  104 thousand. The difference between these amounts arose as
follows:
1.
2.
On 1st February, 20X2, it acquired a machine for 120 thousand. Depreciation is charged
on the machine on a monthly basis for accounting purpose. Under the tax law, the machine
will be depreciated for 6 months. The machine's useful life is 10 years according to Ind AS
as well as for tax purposes.
In the year 20X1-20X2, expenses of 8 thousand were incurred for charitable donations.
These are not deductible for tax purposes.
Prepare necessary entries as at 31st March 20X2, taking current and deferred tax into account.
The tax rate is 25%. Also prepare the tax reconciliation in absolute numbers as well as the tax
rate reconciliation.
Solution
Current tax= Taxable profit x Tax rate = 104 thousand $\times25\%=\boxed{\times}26$ thousand.
Computation of Taxable Profit:
Deferred tax:
Machine's carrying amount according to Ind AS is
 2 thousand)
118 thousand ( 120 thousand
Machine's carrying amount for taxation purpose =
 6 thousand)
114 thousand ( 120 thousand
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.74
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Deferred Tax Liability = 4 thousand x 25%
Tax reconciliation in absolute numbers:
Tax rate reconciliation
*****
1.8.5 Disclosure 5: Change in tax rates
(a) The applicable tax rates may change due to variety of reasons. There could be a change
in the manner of recovery of the asset. The tax laws may have changed. There could be a
change in the structure of the entity.
(b)
In case there are changes in the applicable tax rate(s) compared to the previous accounting
period, an explanation has to be provided.
1.8.6 Disclosure 6: Unrecognised deductible temporary differences,
unused tax losses and unused tax credits
(a) The Standard lays down criteria for recognising deferred tax assets on deductible
temporary differences, unused tax losses and unused tax credits. For example, whether a
sufficient taxable temporary difference is available, is there a probability of future profits
and are there any tax planning opportunities.
(b)
If the laid down recognition criteria could not be met, no deferred tax asset is recognised
on these deductible temporary differences, unused tax losses and unused tax credits.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.75
(c) The Standard requires the amount (and expiry date, if any) of deductible temporary
differences, unused tax losses, and unused tax credits for which no deferred tax asset is
recognised in the balance sheet, to be disclosed.
Relevant Extracts from Financial Statements of selected Listed Entities are presented below:
A.
Annual Report of SpiceJet Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2022 (Page 111):
Brought forward losses and unabsorbed depreciation for which no deferred tax assets have been recognized are attributable
to the following:
# Unabsorbed depreciation does not have any expiry period under the Income-tax Act, 1961
*The following table details the expiry of the brought forward tax losses
The brought forward losses and unabsorbed depreciation considered above includes information from tax records and returns
of the Company filed upto Assessment Year 2021-22 and does not consider the potential effect of matters under dispute/
litigation with the tax authorities which are currently sub-judice at various levels. Also refer note 48.
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of SpiceJet Ltd.)
Annual Report of Larsen and Toubro Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2020 (Page 416):
[NOTE 44]
Disclosure pursuant to Ind AS 12 "Income Taxes" (contd.)
(c) (i) Unused tax losses for which no deferred tax asset (DTA) is recognised in Balance Sheet
(ii) Unrecognised deductible temporary differences for which no deferred tax asset (DTA) is recognised in Balance Sheet
crore
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of Larsen and Toubro Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.76
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.8.7 Disclosure 7: Temporary differences associated with investments
in subsidiaries etc.
(a) The aggregate amount of temporary differences associated with investments in
subsidiaries, branches and associates and interests in joint ventures, for which deferred
tax liabilities have not been recognised should be disclosed.
(b)
It would often be impracticable to compute the amount of unrecognised deferred tax
liabilities arising from investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates and interests
in joint ventures. Therefore, this Standard requires an entity to disclose the aggregate
amount of the underlying temporary differences but does not require disclosure of the
deferred tax liabilities.
(c) Nevertheless, where practicable, entities are encouraged to disclose the amounts of the
unrecognised deferred tax liabilities because financial statement users may find such
information useful.
Relevant Extracts from Financial Statements of selected Listed Entities are presented below:
A
Annual Report of SpiceJet Ltd. for the year ending 31 March 2022 (Page 111):
Brought forward losses and unabsorbed depreciation for which no deferred tax assets have been recognized are attributable
to the following:
# Unabsorbed depreciation does not have any expiry period under the Income-tax Act, 1961
*The following table details the expiry of the brought forward tax losses
The brought forward losses and unabsorbed depreciation considered above includes information from tax records and returns
of the Company filed upto Assessment Year 2021-22 and does not consider the potential effect of matters under dispute/
litigation with the tax authorities which are currently sub-judice at various levels. Also refer note 48.
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of SpiceJet Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
B.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.77
Annual Report of Larsen and Toubro Ltd. for the year ending 31 March 2020 (Page 416):
[NOTE 44]
Disclosure pursuant to Ind AS 12 "Income Taxes" (contd.)
(c) (i) Unused tax losses for which no deferred tax asset (DTA) is recognised in Balance Sheet
(ii) Unrecognised deductible temporary differences for which no deferred tax asset (DTA) is recognised in Balance Sheet
crore
(Source: Annual report for 2021-2022 of Larsen and Toubro Ltd.)
1.8.8 Disclosure 8: Amount of deferred tax liabilities (assets) or income
(a)
(b)
(expenses)
As per the criteria laid down in the Standard, deferred tax liabilities have to be recognised
for taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets have to be recognised for
deductible temporary differences, unused tax losses and unused tax credits.
Where deferred taxes have been recognised, the following should be disclosed in respect
of each type of temporary difference, and in respect of each type of unused tax losses and
unused tax credits:
the amount of the deferred tax assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet
for each period presented;
the amount of the deferred tax income or expense recognised in profit or loss, if this
is not apparent from the changes in the amounts recognised in the balance sheet.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.78
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.8.9 Disclosure 9: Discontinued operations
The following should be disclosed in respect of discontinued operations, the tax expense relating
to:
(i)
the gain or loss on discontinuance; and
(ii)
the profit or loss from the ordinary activities of the discontinued operation for the period,
together with the corresponding amounts for each prior period presented.
1.8.10 Disclosure 10: Dividend tax
(a)
(b)
At times dividends relating to the reporting period are proposed or declared after the
reporting date but before the financial statements are approved for issue. These are
disclosed but not recognised in financial statements.
In such a situation, an entity should disclose the amount of income tax consequences of
dividends to shareholders of the entity that were proposed or declared before the financial
statements were approved for issue, but are not recognised as a liability in the financial
statements.
1.8.11 Disclosures 11: In case of business combination
The following should be disclosed:
if a business combination in which the entity is the acquirer causes a change in the amount
recognised for its pre-acquisition deferred tax asset, the amount of that change; and
if the deferred tax benefits acquired in a business combination are not recognised at the
acquisition date but are recognised after the acquisition date, a description of the event or
change in circumstances that caused the deferred tax benefits to be recognised.
1.8.12 Disclosure 12: Deferred tax asset and evidence thereto where
based on future taxable profits
An entity shall disclose the amount of a deferred tax asset and the nature of the evidence
supporting its recognition, when:
the utilization of the deferred tax asset is dependent on future taxable profits in excess of the
profits arising from the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences; and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.79
the entity has suffered a loss in either the current or preceding period in the tax jurisdiction
to which the deferred tax asset relates.
1.8.13 Disclosure 13: Tax consequences of distribution of dividends
(a)
(b)
(c)
As discussed above, in some tax jurisdiction tax rates depend on the fact whether dividend
is distributed or not.
In these circumstances, an entity shall disclose the nature of the potential income tax
consequences that would result from the payment of dividends to its shareholders. In
addition, the entity shall disclose the amounts of the potential income tax consequences
practicably determinable and whether there are any potential income tax consequences not
practicably determinable.
The aforesaid disclosure requirement requires an entity to disclose the nature of the
potential income tax consequences that would result from the payment of dividends to its
shareholders. An entity also discloses the important features of the income tax systems
and the factors that will affect the amount of the potential income tax consequences of
dividends.
(d) However, it would sometimes not be practicable to compute the total amount of the of the
total amount may be easily determinable. For example, in a consolidated group, a parent
and some of its subsidiaries may have paid income taxes at a higher rate on undistributed
profits and be aware of the amount that would be refunded on the payment of future
dividends to shareholders from consolidated retained earnings. In this case, that refundable
amount is disclosed.
(e)
(f)
If applicable, the entity also discloses that there are additional potential income tax
consequences not practicably determinable. In the parent's separate financial statements,
if any, the disclosure of the potential income tax consequences relates to the parent's
retained earnings.
An entity required to provide the disclosures referred above is also required to provide
disclosures related to temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries,
branches and associates or interests in joint ventures. In such cases, an entity considers
this in determining the information to be disclosed under this requirement. For example,
an entity ay be required to disclose the aggregate amount of temporary differences
associated with investments in subsidiaries for which no deferred tax liabilities have been
recognised. If it is impracticable to compute the amounts of unrecognised deferred tax
liabilities, there may be amounts of potential income tax consequences of dividends not
practicably determinable related to these subsidiaries.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.80
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.8.14 Disclosure 14: Tax related contingencies
An entity discloses any tax-related contingent liabilities and contingent assets in accordance with
Ind AS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets. Contingent liabilities and
contingent assets may arise, for example, from unresolved disputes with the taxation authorities.
1.8.15 Disclosure 15: Change in tax rates or tax laws
Where changes in tax rates or tax laws are enacted or announced after the reporting period, an
entity discloses any significant effect of those changes on its current and deferred tax assets and
liabilities (see Ind AS 10, Events after the Reporting Period).
Relevant Extracts from Financial Statements of selected Listed Entities are presented below:
Annual Report of SpiceJet Ltd. for the year ending 31st March 2020 (Page 415):
[NOTE 44]
Disclosure pursuant to Ind AS 12 "Income Taxes" (contd.)
(b) Reconciliation of tax expense and the accounting profit multiplied by domestic tax rate applicable in India:
2
(1) the provision for current and deferred tax has been determined at the rate of 25.17%,
(II) the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities as at April 1, 2019 have been restated at the rate of 25.17% and
(III) the unutilised credit for minimum alternate tax as at April 1, 2019 has been written-off.
(Source: Annual report of 2019-2020 of SpiceJet Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.81
Illustration 7
An entity has a deductible temporary difference of 50,000. It has no taxable temporary
differences against which it can be offset. The entity is also not anticipating any future profits.
However, it can implement a tax planning strategy which can generate profits up to 60,000. The
cost of implementing this tax planning strategy is
12,000. The tax rate is 30%. Compute the
deferred tax asset that should be recognised.
Solution
The entity should recognise a deferred tax asset of
12,000).
14,400 @ 30% of
48,000 (₹60,000
The balance deferred tax asset of 600 @ 30% on  2,000 (₹50,000  ₹48,000) shall remain
unrecognised.
*****
Illustration 8
A Limited recognises interest income in its books on accrual basis. However, for income tax
purposes the method is 'cash basis'. On 31st December, 20X1, it has interest receivable of
10,000 and the tax rate was 25%. On 28th February, 20X2, the finance bill is introduced in the
legislation that changes the tax rate to 30%. The finance bill is enacted as Act on 21st May, 20X2.
Discuss the treatment of deferred tax in case the reporting date of A Limited's financial statement
is 31st December, 20X1 and these are approved for issued on 31st May, 20X2.
Solution
The difference of 10,000 between the carrying value of interest receivable of 10,000 and its
tax base of NIL is a taxable temporary difference.
A Limited has to recognise a deferred tax liability of  2,500 ( $\mp10,000\times25\%)$ in its financial
statements for the reporting period ended on 31st December, 20Х1.
It will not recognise the deferred tax liability @ 30% because as on 31st December, 20X1, this tax
rate was neither substantively enacted or enacted on the reporting date. However, if the effect of
this change is material, A Limited should disclose this difference in its financial statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
7.82
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 9
A Ltd prepares financial statements to 31st March each year. The rate of income tax applicable
to A Ltd is 20%. The following information relates to transactions, assets and liabilities of A Ltd
during the year ended 31st March 20X2:
(i)
(ii)
A Ltd has a 40% shareholding in L Ltd. A Ltd purchased this shareholding for  45 Cr. The
shareholding gives A Ltd significant influence over L Ltd but not control and therefore A
Ltd. accounts for its interest in L Ltd using the equity method. The equity method carrying
value of A Ltd's investment in L Ltd was  70 Cr on 31st March 20X1 and 75 Cr on
31st March 20X2. In the tax jurisdiction in which A Ltd operates, profits recognised under
the equity method are taxed if and when they are distributed as a dividend or the relevant
investment is disposed of.
A Ltd. measures its head office building using the revaluation model. The building is
revalued every year on 31st March. On 31st March 20X1, carrying value of the building
(after revaluation) was 40 Cr and its tax base was 22 Cr. During the year ended
31st March 20X2, A Ltd charged depreciation in its statement of profit or loss of 2 Cr and
claimed a tax deduction for tax depreciation of  1.25 Cr. On 31st March 20X2, the building
was revalued to  45 Cr. In the tax jurisdiction in which A Ltd operates, revaluation of
property, plant and equipment does not affect taxable income at the time of revaluation.
Basis the above information, you are required to compute:
(a)
The deferred tax liability of A Ltd at 31st March 20X2
(b)
The charge or credit to both profit or loss and other comprehensive income relating to
deferred tax for the year ended 31st March 20X2
Solution:
(A) Deferred Tax Liability as at 31st March 20X2
Investment in L Ltd:
75 Cr
Since carrying amount is higher than the tax base, the temporary difference is recognized
as a taxable temporary difference. Using the tax rate of 20%, a deferred tax liability of 6
Cr is recognized:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Head office building
Carrying Amount
Tax base
Temporary Difference
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.83
=
 45 Cr (Revalued amount on 31st March 20X2)
=
20.75 Cr (22 Cr – 1.25 Cr)
=
24.25 Cr
Since carrying amount is higher than the tax base, the temporary difference is recognized
as a taxable temporary difference. Using the tax rate of 20%, a deferred tax liability of
4.85 Cr is created.
Total Deferred Tax Liability
$\mp6~Cr+\mathbb{\times}4.85~Cr=\mathbb{\times}10.85~Cr$
(B) Charge to Statement of Profit or Loss for the year ended 31st March 20X2:
Investment in L Ltd.
Considering the increase in the value of investment arising through Statement of Profit or
Loss, the accounting for the increase in deferred tax liability is made as under:
Tax expense (Profit or Loss Statement)
To Deferred Tax Liability
(Being increase in deferred tax liability recognized)
Dr
1 Cr
1 Cr
Head Office Building:
The deferred tax liability at 31st March 20X1 is 3.6 Cr $(20\%\times\{\overline{r}40~Cr-\overline{r}22~Cr\}).$
At 31st March 20X2, prior to revaluation, the carrying amount of the property is 38 Cr and
its tax base is 20.75 Cr ( 22 Cr -1.25 Cr). The deferred tax liability at this point is
 3.45 Cr $(20\%\times\{\overline{r}38~Cr-\overline{r}20.75~Cr\})$ .
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.84
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The reduction in this liability is 0.15 Cr (3.6 Cr  3.45 Cr). This would be credited to
income tax expense in arriving at profit or loss.
Post revaluation, the carrying value of the building becomes
the same. Therefore, the new deferred tax liability is
20.75 Cr)). The increase in the deferred tax liability of
is charged to other comprehensive income.
45 Cr and the tax base stays
4.85 Cr (20% x ( 45 Cr -
1.4 Cr (4.85 Cr   3.45 Cr)
*****
Illustration 10
K Ltd prepares consolidated financial statements to 31st March each year. During the year ended
31st March 20X2, K Ltd entered into the following transactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
On 1st April 20X1, K Ltd purchased an equity investment for  2,00,000. The investment
was designated as fair value through other comprehensive income. On 31st March 20X2,
the fair value of the investment was 2,40,000. In the tax jurisdiction in which K Ltd
operates, unrealised gains and losses arising on the revaluation of investments of this
nature are not taxable unless the investment is sold. K Ltd has no intention of selling the
investment in the foreseeable future.
On 1st August 20X1, K Ltd sold products to A Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary operating in
the same tax jurisdiction as K Ltd, for ₹80,000. The goods had cost to K Ltd for 64,000.
By 31st March 20X2, A Ltd had sold 40% of these goods, selling the remaining during next
year.
On 31st October 20X1, K Ltd received 2,00,000 from a customer. This payment was in
respect of services to be provided by K Ltd from 1st November 20X1 to 31st July 20X2. K
Ltd recognised revenue of  1,20,000 in respect of this transaction in the year ended
31st March 20X2 and will recognise the remainder in the year ended 31st March 20X3.
Under the tax jurisdiction in which K Ltd operates,2,00,000 received on 31st October
20X1 was included in the taxable profits of K Ltd for the year ended 31st March 20X2.
Explain and show how the tax consequences (current and deferred) of the three transactions
would be reported in its statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the year
ended 31st March 20X2. Assume tax rate to be 25%.
Solution:
(a)
Because the unrealised gain on revaluation of the equity investment is not taxable until
sold, there are no current tax consequences. The tax base of the investment is  2,00,000.
The revaluation creates a taxable temporary difference of 40,000 ( 2,40,000
 2,00,000).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.85
(b)
(c)
This creates a deferred tax liability of 10,000 (₹40,000 x 25%). The liability would be
non-current. The fact that there is no intention to dispose of the investment does not affect
the accounting treatment. Because the unrealised gain is reported in other comprehensive
income, the related deferred tax expense is also reported in other comprehensive income.
When K Ltd sold the products to A Ltd, K Ltd would have generated a taxable profit of
16,000 ( 80,000   64,000). This would have created a current tax liability for K Ltd and
the group of 4,000 (₹16,000 x 25%). This liability would be shown as a current liability
and charged as an expense in arriving at profit or loss for the period.
In the consolidated financial statements the carrying value of the unsold inventory would
be 38,400 (64,000 x 60%). The tax base of the unsold inventory would be  48,000
( 80,000 x 60%). In the consolidated financial statements there would be a deductible
temporary difference of  9,600 (₹38,400   48,000) and a potential deferred tax asset
of 2,400 $(\mp9,600\times25\%)$. This would be recognised as a deferred tax asset since A Ltd
is expected to generate sufficient taxable profits against which to utilise the deductible
temporary difference. The resulting credit would reduce consolidated deferred tax
expense in arriving at profit or loss.
The receipt of revenue in advance on 1st October 20X1 would create a current tax liability
of  50,000 ( 200,000 x 25%) as at 31st March 20X2. The carrying value of the revenue
received in advance at 31st March 20X2 is
80,000 (₹ 200,000   120,000). Its tax base
is nil. The deductible temporary difference of
80,000 would create a deferred tax asset
of 20,000 ( 80,000 x 25%). The asset can be recognised because K Ltd has sufficient
taxable profits against which to utilise the deductible temporary difference.
*****
1.9 SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN IND AS 12 VIS-À-VIS AS 22
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.86
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.87
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.88
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.89
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
2.
3.
4.
An asset which cost
150 has a carrying amount of 100. Cumulative depreciation for
tax purposes is 90 and the tax rate is 25%. Calculate the tax base and the corresponding
deferred tax or liability, if any.
On 1st April 20X1, ABC Ltd acquired 100% shares of XYZ Ltd for 4,373 crore. By
31st March, 20X5, XYZ Ltd had made profits of 5 crore, which remain undistributed.
Based on the tax legislation in India, the tax base investment in XYZ Ltd is its original cost.
Show deferred tax treatment.
ABC Ltd. acquired 30% of the shares in PQR Ltd. on 1st January, 20X1 for 1,000 crore.
By 31st March, 20X5, PQR Ltd. had made profits of 50 crore (ABC Ltd.'s share), which
remained undistributed. Based on the tax legislation in India, the tax base of the investment
in PQR Ltd. is its original cost. Show deferred tax treatment.
A company had purchased an asset at 1,00,000. Estimated useful life of the asset is
5 years and depreciation rate is 20% SLM. Depreciation rate for tax purposes is 25% SLM.
The operating profit is 1,00,000 for all the 5 years. Tax rate is 30% for the next 5 years.
Calculate the Book Value as per financial and tax purposes and then DTL.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.90
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5. A Ltd. acquired B Ltd. The following assets and liabilities are acquired in a business
combination:
Assume tax rate as 30%.
000's
6.
7.
Calculate deferred tax asset assuming that the carrying amount is the tax base and prepare
the journal entries.
B Limited is a newly incorporated entity. Its first financial period ends on 31st March, 20X1.
As on the said date, the following temporary differences exist:
(a)
(b)
Taxable temporary differences relating to accelerated depreciation of  9,000. These
are expected to reverse equally over next 3 years.
Deductible temporary differences relating to preliminary expenses of  4,000 expected
to reverse equally over next 4 years.
It is expected that B Limited will continue to make losses for next 5 years. Tax rate is 30%.
Losses can be carried forward but not backwards.
Discuss the treatment of deferred tax as on 31st March, 20X1.
X Ltd. prepares consolidated financial statements to 31st March each year. During the year
ended 31st March 20X2, the following events affected the tax position of the group:
(i) Y Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of X Ltd., made a loss adjusted for tax purposes
of 30,00,000. Y Ltd. is unable to utilise this loss against previous tax liabilities.
Income-tax Act does not allow Y Ltd. to transfer the tax loss to other group
companies. However, it allows Y Ltd. to carry the loss forward and utilise it against
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.91
(ii)
company's future taxable profits. The directors of X Ltd. do not consider that Y Ltd.
will make taxable profits in the foreseeable future.
Just before 31st March, 20X2, X Ltd. committed itself to closing a division after the
year end, making a number of employees redundant. Therefore, X Ltd. recognised
a provision for closure costs of 20,00,000 in its balance sheet as at 31st March,
20X2. Income-tax Act allows tax deductions for closure costs only when the closure
actually takes place. In the year ended 31st March 20X3, X Ltd. expects to make
taxable profits which are well in excess of 20,00,000. On 31st March, 20X2, X Ltd.
had taxable temporary differences from other sources which were greater than
 20,00,000.
(iii) During the year ended 31st March, 20X1, X Ltd. capitalised development costs which
satisfied the criteria in paragraph 57 of Ind AS 38 'Intangible Assets'. The total
amount capitalised was 16,00,000. The development project began to generate
economic benefits for X Ltd. from 1st January, 20X2. The directors of X Ltd.
estimated that the project would generate economic benefits for five years from that
date. The development expenditure was fully deductible against taxable profits for
the year ended 31st March, 20X2.
(iv) On 1st April, 20X1, X Ltd. borrowed  1,00,00,000. The cost to X Ltd. of arranging
the borrowing was 2,00,000 and this cost qualified for a tax deduction on 1st April,
20X1. The loan was for a three-year period. No interest was payable on the loan
but the amount repayable on 31st March, 20X4 will be 1,30,43,800. This equates
to an effective annual interest rate of 10%. As per the Income-tax Act, a further tax
deduction of 30,43,800 will be claimable when the loan is repaid on 31st March,
20X4.
Explain and show how each of these events would affect the deferred tax assets / liabilities
in the consolidated balance sheet of X Ltd. group at 31st March, 20X2 as per Ind AS.
Assume the rate of corporate income tax is 20%.
Answers
1. The tax base of the asset is 60 (cost of 150 less cumulative tax depreciation of  90).
To recover the carrying amount of 100, the entity must earn taxable income of 100, but
will only be able to deduct tax depreciation of 60. Consequently, the entity will pay income
taxes of  10 ( 40 at 25%) when it recovers the carrying amount of the asset. The
difference between the carrying amount of 100 and the tax base of 60 is a taxable
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.92
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.
3.
temporary difference of 40. Therefore, the entity recognises a deferred tax liability of
10 ( 40 at 25%) representing the income taxes that it will pay when it recovers the carrying
amount of the asset.
A taxable temporary difference of 5 crore exists between the carrying value of the
investment in XYZ at the reporting date of 4,378 crore (4,373 crore + 5 crore) and its
tax base of 4,373 crore. Since a parent, by definition, controls a subsidiary, it will be able
to control the reversal of this temporary difference, for example through control of the
dividend policy of the subsidiary. Therefore, deferred tax on such temporary difference is
generally not provided unless it is probable that the temporary will reverse in the
foreseeable future.
A taxable temporary difference of 50 crore therefore exists between the carrying value of
the investment in PQR at the reporting date of 1,050 crore ( 1,000 crore +  50 crore)
and its tax base of  1,000 crore. As ABC Ltd. does not completely control PQR Ltd. it is
not in a position to control the dividend policy of PQR Ltd. As a result, it cannot control the
reversal of this temporary difference and deferred tax is provided on temporary differences
arising on investments in PQR Ltd. i.e. 50 crore.
4. Calculation of the Book Value as per financial and tax purposes.
Calculation of DTL:
000's
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.
6.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 12
7.93
In this case there is a Deferred Tax Asset as the Tax base of assets acquired is higher by
25,000. DTA would be₹7,500 (25,000 x 30%)
Plant and equipment
Inventory
Debtors
Goodwill
DTA
Journal entry:
Dr 250
Dr 120
Dr
200
Dr
22.5 (30-7.5)
Dr
7.5
The year-wise anticipated reversal of temporary differences is as under:
B Limited will recognise a deferred tax liability of 2,700 on taxable temporary difference
relating to accelerated depreciation of 9,000 @ 30%.
However, it will limit and recognise a deferred tax asset on reversal of deductible temporary
difference relating to preliminary expenses reversing up to year ending 31st March, 20X4
amounting to 900 (₹3,000 @ 30%). No deferred tax asset shall be recognized for the
reversal of deductible temporary difference for the year ending on 31st March, 20X5 as there
are no taxable temporary differences. Further, the outlook is also a loss. However, if there
are tax planning opportunities that could be identified for the year ending on 31st March, 20X5
deferred tax asset on the remainder of  1,000 ( 4,000  ₹3,000) of deductible temporary
difference could be recognised at the 30% tax rate.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.
(i)
7.94
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The tax loss creates a potential deferred tax asset for the group since its carrying
value is nil and its tax base is 30,00,000.
However, no deferred tax asset can be recognised because there is no prospect of
being able to reduce tax liabilities in the foreseeable future as no taxable profits are
anticipated.
(ii) The provision creates a potential deferred tax asset for the group since its carrying
value is 20,00,000 and its tax base is nil.
(iii)
This deferred tax asset can be recognised because X Ltd. is expected to generate
taxable profits in excess of 20,00,000 in the year to 31st March, 20X3.
The amount of the deferred tax asset will be 4,00,000 (₹20,00,000 x 20%).
This asset will be presented as a deduction from the deferred tax liabilities caused
by the (larger) taxable temporary differences.
The development costs have a carrying value of ₹15,20,000 ( 16,00,000
$(\overline{x}16,00,000\times1/5\times3/12))$.
The tax base of the development costs is nil since the relevant tax deduction has
already been claimed.
The deferred tax liability will be₹3,04,000 ( $=15,20,000\times20\%)$. All deferred tax
liabilities are shown as non-current.
(iv) The carrying value of the loan at 31st March, 20X2 is 1,07,80,000 ( 1,00,00,000
$-\mathbb{r}2,00,000+(\mathbb{r}98,00,000\times10\%)$.
The tax base of the loan is 1,00,00,000.
This creates a deductible temporary difference of ₹7,80,000 ( 1,07,80,000
1,00,00,000) and a potential deferred tax asset of  1,56,000 ( 7,80,000 x 20%).
Due to the availability of taxable profits next year (see part (ii) above), this asset can
be recognised as a deduction from deferred tax liabilities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
