5.44
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT 2 :
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16 : PROPERTY,
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to
☐
State the objective and scope of this standard
☐ Define various terms used in the standard
☐
☐
☐
☐
Apply the revaluation and cost models of accounting for property, plant
and equipment
Interpret the differences between repairs and maintenance, replacement
and major inspection
Account for the changes in depreciation method, useful life and residual
value
Integrate the accounting for changes in existing, decommissioning,
restoration and similar assets
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.45
UNIT OVERVIEW
Recognition
Initial costs
Subsequent
costs
Measurement
at recognition
Elements of
cost
Ind AS 16
Measurement after
recognition
Cost model
Measurement
of cost
Revaluation model
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Derecognition Disclosure
Depreciation
Depreciable amount
and depreciation
period
Depreciation method
Impairment
Compensation for
impairment
5.46
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.1 OBJECTIVE
The objective of this Standard is to prescribe the accounting treatment for property, plant and
equipment so that users of the financial statements can discern information about an entity's
investment in its property, plant and equipment and the changes in such investment. The principal
issues in accounting for property, plant and equipment are the recognition of the assets, the
determination of their carrying amounts and the depreciation charges and impairment losses to be
recognized in relation to them.
2.2 SCOPE
This Standard shall be applied in accounting for property, plant and equipment except when
another Standard requires or permits a different accounting treatment.
This Standard does not apply to:
(a) PPE classified as held for
sale (as per Ind AS 105)
(c)
Recognition and
measurement of exploration
and evaluation assets (Ind AS
106)
(b) Biological assets related to
agricultural activity other than
bearer plants (Ind AS 41)
(d) Mineral rights and mineral
reserves such as oil, natural
gas and similar
regenerative resources
non-
However, this Standard applies to property, plant and equipment used to develop or maintain
the assets described in (b)-(d).
An entity accounting for investment property in accordance with Ind AS-40, Investment
Property, shall use the cost model in this Standard for owned investment property.
2.3 RELEVANT DEFINITIONS
The following are the key terms used in this standard:
Property, plant and equipment are tangible items that:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.47
(a)
are held for use in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others,
or for administrative purposes; and
(b)
are expected to be used during more than one period.
Tangible items
Held for use in production or
supply/Rental / Administrative
purposes
A bearer plant is a living plant that:
PPE
Expected to used
during more than one
period
(a)
is used in the production or supply of agricultural produce;
(b)
is expected to bear produce for more than one period; and
(c)
has a remote likelihood of being sold as agricultural produce, except for incidental
scrap sales.
Carrying amount is the amount at which an asset is recognized after deducting any
accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
Cost is the amount of cash or cash equivalents paid or the fair value of the other consideration
given to acquire an asset at the time of its acquisition or construction or, where applicable,
the amount attributed to that asset when initially recognized in accordance with the specific
requirements of other Indian Accounting Standards, e.g. Ind AS 102, Share-based Payment.
Depreciable amount is the cost of an asset, or other amount substituted for cost, less its
residual value.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.48
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Depreciation is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an asset over its
useful life.
Entity-specific value is the present value of the cash flows an entity expects to arise from
the continuing use of an asset and from its disposal at the end of its useful life or expects to
incur when settling a liability.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in
an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. (See
Ind AS 113, Fair Value Measurement.)
An impairment loss is the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its
recoverable amount.
Recoverable amount is the higher of an asset's fair value less costs of disposal and its value
in use.
The residual value of an asset is the estimated amount that an entity would currently obtain
from disposal of the asset, after deducting the estimated costs of disposal, if the asset were
already of the age and in the condition expected at the end of its useful life.
Useful life is:
(a)
the period over which an asset is expected to be available for use by an entity; or
(b)
the number of production or similar units expected to be obtained from the asset by
an entity.
2.4 RECOGNITION
2.4.1 General recognition criteria
The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment shall be recognized as an asset if, and only if:
(a)
it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the entity; and
(b)
the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
Probable that
future economic
benefits will flow
to entity
+
Recognition of
cost as an asset
(PPE)
Cost can be
measured
reliably
5.49
2.4.2 Recognition of Spare parts, stand-by equipment and servicing
equipment
Items such as spare parts, stand-by equipment and servicing equipment are recognized in
accordance with this Ind AS when they meet the definition of property, plant and equipment.
Otherwise, such items are classified as inventory.
2.4.3 Unit of measurement for recognition of PPE and Aggregation of
individually insignificant items
This Standard does not prescribe the unit of measure for recognition, ie what constitutes an item of
property, plant and equipment. Thus, judgement is required in applying the recognition criteria to
an entity's specific circumstances. It may be appropriate to aggregate individually insignificant
items, such as moulds, tools and dies, and to apply the criteria to the aggregate value.
An entity evaluates under this recognition principle all its property, plant and equipment costs at the
time they are incurred. These costs include costs incurred initially to acquire or construct an item of
property, plant and equipment and costs incurred subsequently to add to, replace part of, or service it.
2.4.4 Initial Cost
Items of property, plant and equipment may be acquired for safety or environmental reasons. The
acquisition of such property, plant and equipment, although not directly increasing the future
economic benefits of any particular existing item of property, plant and equipment, may be necessary
for an entity to obtain the future economic benefits from its other assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.50
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Such items of property, plant and equipment qualify for recognition as assets because they enable
an entity to derive future economic benefits from related assets in excess of what could be derived
had those items not been acquired.
For example: A chemical manufacturer may install new chemical handling processes to comply with
environmental requirements for the production and storage of dangerous chemicals; related plant
enhancements are recognized as an asset because without them the entity is unable to manufacture
and sell chemicals. However, the resulting carrying amount of such an asset and related assets is
reviewed for impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36 Impairment of Assets.
2.4.5 Subsequent costs
Repair & Maintenance
(Day to Day Servicing)
Replacement at
Regular
Intervals
Major Inspection
/ Overhauls
2.4.5.1 Repair and maintenance
An entity does not recognize in the carrying amount of an item of property, plant and equipment the
costs of the day-to-day servicing of the item. Rather, these costs are recognized in profit or loss as
incurred. Costs of day-to-day servicing are primarily the costs of labour and consumables and may
include the cost of small parts.
2.4.5.2 Replacement of parts of a property, plant and equipment
Parts of some items of property, plant and equipment may require replacement at regular
intervals. For example, a furnace may require relining after a specified number of hours of
use, or aircraft interiors such as seats and galleys may require replacement several times
during the life of the airframe.
Items of property, plant and equipment may also be acquired to make a less frequently
recurring replacement, such as replacing the interior walls of a building, or to make a non-
recurring replacement.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.51
Under the recognition principle, an entity recognizes in the carrying amount of an item of
property, plant and equipment the cost of replacing part of such an item when that cost is
incurred if the recognition criteria are met. The carrying amount of those parts that are
replaced is derecognized in accordance with the derecognition provisions of this Standard.
2.4.5.3 Major inspections or overhauls
A condition of continuing to operate an item of property, plant and equipment (for example,
an aircraft) may be performing regular major inspections for faults regardless of whether parts
of the item are replaced.
When each major inspection is performed, its cost is recognized in the carrying amount of the
item of property, plant and equipment as a replacement if the recognition criteria are satisfied.
Any remaining carrying amount of the cost of the previous inspection is derecognized. This
occurs regardless of whether the cost of the previous inspection was identified in the
transaction in which the item was acquired or constructed. If necessary, the estimated cost
of a future similar inspection may be used as an indication of what the cost of the existing
inspection component was when the item was acquired or constructed.
Example - Inspection Cost
A shipping company is required by law to bring all ships into dry dock every five years for
a major inspection and overhaul. Overhaul expenditure might at first sight seem to be a
repair to ships but it is actually a cost incurred in getting the ship back into a seaworthy
condition. As such the costs must be capitalised.
A ship which cost 20 million with a 20 year life must have major overhaul every five years.
The estimated cost of the overhaul at the five-year point is 5 million.
The depreciation charge for the first five years of the assets life will be as follows:
Overhaul component
Ship (other than overhaul
component) (million)
Cost
Years
Depreciation per year
(million)
5
5
1
15
20
0.75
Total accumulated depreciation for the first five years will be 8.75 million $(\overline{x}(1+0.75)\times$
5), and the carrying amount of the ship at the end of year 5 will be 11.25 million (20
less 8.75).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.52
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Assume that the actual overhaul costs incurred at the end of year 5 are 6 million. This
amount will now be capitalised into the costs of the ship, to give a carrying amount of
17.25 million (being 11.25 million plus 6 million).
The depreciation charge for years 6 to 10 will be as follows:
Annual depreciation for years 6 to 10 will now be 1.95 million [ $(1.2+0.75)]$. This
process will be continued for years 11 to 15 and years 16 to 20. By the end of year 20, the
capital cost of 20 million will have been depreciated plus the actual overhaul costs
incurred at years 5, 10 and 15.
2.5 MEASUREMENT AT RECOGNITION
2.5.1 Measurement at cost
An item of property, plant and equipment that qualifies for recognition as an asset should be initially
measured at its cost.
2.5.2 Element of cost
2.5.2.1 Cost of an acquired asset
2.5.2.1.1 Component of cost
The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment comprises:
(a)
its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase taxes, after
deducting trade discounts and rebates;
(b)
any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition
necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management;
and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(c)
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.53
the initial estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item and restoring the
site on which it is located, the obligation for which an entity incurs either when the item
is acquired or as a consequence of having used the item during a particular period for
purposes other than to produce inventories during that period.
Initially measured at Cost
Purchase price
including import
duties and non -
refundable
purchase taxes
Directly
attributable Cost
Examples of directly attributable costs are:
Initial estimate of the costs of
dismantling and removing
the item and restoring
Employee benefits cost arising directly from construction or acquisition of PPE
Cost of Site Preparation
Initial delivery and handling costs
Installation and assembly costs
Professional Fees
Costs of testing whether the asset is functioning properly, after deducting the net
proceeds from selling any items produced while bringing the asset to that location
and condition (such as samples produced when testing equipment).
Note: Excess of net sale proceeds of items produced over the cost of testing, if
any, shall not be recognized in the profit or loss but deducted from the directly
attributable costs considered as part of cost of an item of property, plant, and
equipment
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.54
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Examples of costs that are not costs of an item of property, plant and equipment
are:
Costs of
conducting
business in a
new location or
with a new class
of customer
(including costs
of staff training)
Costs incurred in
introducing a
new product or
service
Cost of opening
a new facility
Administrative
and other
general
overhead costs
2.5.2.2 Cost of self-constructed asset and Bearer Plants
The cost of a self-constructed asset is determined using the same principles as for an acquired
asset. If an entity makes similar assets for sale in the normal course of business, the cost of the
asset is usually the same as the cost of constructing an asset for sale. Therefore, any internal profits
are eliminated in arriving at such costs.
Similarly, the cost of abnormal amounts of wasted material, labour, or other resources incurred in
self-constructing an asset is not included in the cost of the asset.
Ind AS 23 'Borrowing Costs', establishes criteria for the recognition of interest as a component of
the carrying amount of a self-constructed item of property, plant and equipment.
Bearer plants are accounted for in the same way as self-constructed items of property, plant and
equipment before they are in the location and condition necessary to be capable of operating in the
manner intended by management. Consequently, references to 'construction' in this Standard
should be read as covering activities that are necessary to cultivate the bearer plants before they
are in the location and condition necessary to be capable of operating in the manner intended by
management.
2.5.2.3 Cost of dismantling, removal and site restoration
Cost incurred by an entity in respect of obligation for dismantling, removing and restoring the site on
which an item of property, plant and equipment is located are recognized and measured in
accordance with Ind AS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.55
If the obligations are incurred when the asset is acquired, or during a period when the item is used
other than to produce inventories, they are included in the cost of the item property, plant and
equipment.
An entity applies Ind AS 2, Inventories, to the costs of obligations for dismantling, removing and
restoring the site on which an item is located that are incurred during a particular period as a
consequence of having used the item to produce inventories during that period.
2.5.2.4 Incidental operations
Some operations occur in connection with the construction or development of an item of property,
plant and equipment, but are not necessary to bring the item to the location and condition necessary
for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
These incidental operations may occur before or during the construction or development activities.
For example, income may be earned through using a building site as a car park until construction
starts.
Because incidental operations are not necessary to bring an item to the location and condition
necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management, the income and
related expenses of incidental operations are recognized in profit or loss and included in their
respective classifications of income and expense.
2.5.2.5 Cessation of capitalisation
Recognition of costs in the carrying amount of an item of property, plant and equipment ceases when
the item is in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner
intended by management. Therefore, costs incurred in using or redeploying an item are not included
in the carrying amount of that item.
For example, the following costs are not included in the carrying amount of an item of
property, plant and equipment:
(a)
(b)
(c)
costs incurred while an item capable of operating in the manner intended by
management has yet to be brought into use or is operated at less than full capacity;
initial operating losses, such as those incurred while demand for the item's output
builds up; and
costs of relocating or reorganizing part or all of an entity's operations.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.56
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example
Moon Ltd incurs the following costs in relation to the construction of a new factory and the
introduction of its products to the local market. The below table illustrates which of the items
2.5.3 Measurement of cost
2.5.3.1 Payment deferred beyond normal credit terms
The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment is the cash price equivalent at the recognition
date. If payment is deferred beyond normal credit terms, the difference between the cash price
equivalent and the total payment is recognized as interest over the period of credit unless such
interest is capitalised in accordance with Ind AS 23.
Illustration 1 - Deferred Payment Credit
On 1st April, 20X1, an item of property is offered for sale at 10 million, with payment terms being
three equal installments of 33,33,333 over a two-year period (payments are made on
1st April, 20X1, 31st March, 20X2 and 31st March, 20X3). Implicit interest rate of 5.36 percent p.a.
Pass necessary journal entries for recording the property in accordance with Ind AS 16.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.57
Solution
Ind AS 16 requires that the cost of an item of PPE is the cash price equivalent at the recognition
date. Hence, the purchaser that takes up the deferred payment terms will recognize the acquisition
of the asset as follows:
Working Notes:
1. Calculation of cash price equivalent at initial recognition
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.58
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.
Calculation of interest expenses
*Difference of 116 [(31,63,867 x 5.36%) – (33,33,334 - 31,63,867)] is due to approximation.
*****
2.5.3.2 Measurement of PPE acquired in Exchange
One or more items of property, plant and equipment may be acquired in exchange for a non-
monetary asset or assets, or a combination of monetary and non-monetary assets. The cost
of such an item of property, plant and equipment is measured at fair value (even if an entity
cannot immediately derecognize the asset given up) unless:
(a) the exchange transaction lacks commercial substance; or
(b)
the fair value of neither the asset received nor the asset given up is reliably
measurable.
If the acquired item is not measured at fair value [because of considerations mentioned in a)
and b) above], its cost is measured at the carrying amount of the asset given up.
An entity determines whether an exchange transaction has commercial substance by
considering the extent to which its future cash flows are expected to change as a result of the
transaction. An exchange transaction has commercial substance if:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the configuration (risk, timing and amount) of the cash flows of the asset received
differs from the configuration of the cash flows of the asset transferred; or
the entity-specific value of the portion of the entity's operations affected by the
transaction changes as a result of the exchange; and
the difference in (a) or (b) is significant relative to the fair value of the assets
exchanged.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.59
For the purpose of determining whether an exchange transaction has commercial substance,
the entity-specific value of the portion of the entity's operations affected by the transaction
shall reflect post-tax cash flows.
The fair value of an asset is reliably measurable if:
(a)
(b)
the variability in the range of reasonable fair value measurements is not significant for
that asset or
the probabilities of the various estimates within the range can be reasonably assessed
and used when measuring fair value.
If an entity is able to measure reliably the fair value of either the asset received or the asset
given up, then the fair value of the asset given up is used to measure the cost of the asset
received unless the fair value of the asset received is more clearly evident.
The carrying amount of an item of property, plant and equipment may be reduced by
Government grants in accordance with Ind AS 20, Accounting for Government Grants and
Disclosure of Government Assistance.
If PPE is acquired in exchange for other non monetary asset or for a combination of monetary
and non monetary asset
Illustration 2 - Exchange of Assets
Pluto Ltd owns land and building which are carried in its balance sheet at an aggregate carrying
amount of 10 million. The fair value of such asset is 15 million. It exchanges the land and
building for a private jet, which has a fair value of 20 million, and pays additional 3 million in
cash.
Apply necessary provisions of Ind AS 16 for the above transactions and pass journal entry for the
same.
Solution
Provided that the transaction has commercial substance, the entity should recognize the private jet
at a cost of 18 million (being 15 million plus 3 million cash) and should recognize a profit on
disposal of the land and building of 5 million, calculated as follow:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.60
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The required journal entry is therefore as follow:
*****
2.6 MEASUREMENT AFTER RECOGNITION
2.6.1 Alternative bases available for measurement after recognition
An entity shall choose either the cost model or the revaluation model as its accounting policy and
shall apply that policy to an entire class of property, plant and equipment.
2.6.2 Cost model
After recognition as an asset, an item of property, plant and equipment shall be carried at its cost
less any accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Cost
Accumulated
Depreciation
Accumulated
Impairment
Loss
Carrying
Amount
2.6.3 Revaluation model
After recognition as an asset, an item of property, plant and equipment whose fair value can be
measured reliably is carried at a revalued amount, being its fair value at the date of the revaluation
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.61
less any subsequent accumulated depreciation and subsequent accumulated impairment losses.
Revaluations are required to be carried out with sufficient regularity to ensure that the carrying
amount does not differ materially from that which would be determined using fair value at the end of
the reporting period.
FV at the
Subsequent
Subsequent
accumulated
date of
accumulated
revaluation
Depreciation
Impairment
loss
Carrying
amount
2.6.3.1 Frequency of revaluations
The frequency of revaluations depends upon the changes in fair values of the items of
property, plant and equipment being revalued. When the fair value of a revalued asset differs
materially from its carrying amount, a further revaluation is required. Some items of property,
plant and equipment experience significant and volatile changes in fair value, thus
necessitating annual revaluation.
Such frequent revaluations are unnecessary for items of property, plant and equipment with
only insignificant changes in fair value. Instead, it may be necessary to revalue the item only
every three or five years.
2.6.3.2 Accumulated depreciation at the date of revaluation
When an item of property, plant and equipment is revalued, the carrying amount of that asset
is adjusted to the revalued amount. At the date of the revaluation, the asset is treated in one
of the following ways:
(a)
(b)
the gross carrying amount is adjusted in a manner that is consistent with the
revaluation of the carrying amount of the asset. For example, the gross carrying
amount may be restated by reference to observable market data or it may be restated
proportionately to the change in the carrying amount. The accumulated depreciation
at the date of the revaluation is adjusted to equal the difference between the gross
carrying amount and the carrying amount of the asset after taking into account
accumulated impairment losses; or
the accumulated depreciation is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the
asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.62
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 3: Accumulated depreciation at the date of revaluation
Jupiter Ltd. has an item of property, plant and equipment with an initial cost of  100,000. At the
date of revaluation accumulated depreciation amounted to 55,000. The fair value of asset, by
reference to transactions in similar assets, is assessed to be 65,000.
Prepare the necessary journal entries.
Solution
Method - I: Depreciation Elimination Approach
The net result is that the asset has a carrying amount of  65,000 (100,000 – 55,000 + 20,000).
Method - II: Restatement Approach
Carrying amount (100,000 – 55,000) =
45,000
Fair value (revalued amount)
65,000
Surplus
20,000
% of surplus to the carrying amount (20,000 / 45,000)
44.44%
Entries to be Made:
Asset (1,00,000 x 44.44%)
Dr.
44,444
(Being the entry to increase both the original cost and the accumulated depreciation by 44.44%)
*****
2.6.3.3 Revaluation to be made for entire class of assets
If an item of property, plant and equipment is revalued, the entire class of property, plant and
equipment to which that asset belongs shall be revalued.
A class of property, plant and equipment is a grouping of assets of a similar nature and use in an
entity's operations. The following are examples of separate classes:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
Land
Land And Buildings
Machinery
Ships
Aircraft
Motor Vehicles
Furnitire and Fixtures
Office Equipment
Bearer Plants
5.63
The items within a class of property, plant and equipment are revalued simultaneously to avoid
selective revaluation of assets and the reporting of amounts in the financial statements that are a
mixture of costs and values as at different dates.
However, a class of assets may be revalued on a rolling basis provided revaluation of the class of
assets is completed within a short period and provided the revaluations are kept up to date.
Illustration 4: Revaluation model for entire class
Venus Ltd. is a large manufacturing group. It owns a considerable number of industrial buildings,
such as factories and warehouses, and office buildings in several capital cities. The industrial
buildings are located in industrial zones whereas the office buildings are in central business districts
of the cities. Venus's Ltd. management wants to apply the Ind AS 16 revaluation model to
subsequent measurement of the office buildings but continue to apply the historical cost model to
the industrial buildings.
Analyse the accounting treatment to be applied by the management in the light of Ind AS 16.
Solution
Venus's Ltd. management can apply the revaluation model only to the office buildings.
The office buildings can be clearly distinguished from the industrial buildings in terms of their
function, their nature and their general location.
Ind AS 16 permits assets to be revalued on a class-by-class basis.
The different characteristics of the buildings enable them to be classified as different PPE classes. The
different measurement models can therefore be applied to these classes for subsequent measurement.
All properties within the class of office buildings must therefore be carried at revalued amount.
Separate disclosure of the two classes must be given in accordance with para 73 of Ind AS 16.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.64
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.6.3.4 Treatment of surplus or deficit arising on revaluation
If an asset's carrying amount is increased as a result of a revaluation, the increase shall be
recognized in other comprehensive income and accumulated in equity under the heading of
revaluation surplus. However, the increase shall be recognized in profit or loss to the extent
that it reverses a revaluation decrease of the same asset previously recognized in profit or loss.
If an asset's carrying amount is decreased as a result of a revaluation, the decrease shall be
recognized in profit or loss. However, the decrease shall be recognized in other
comprehensive income to the extent of any credit balance existing in the revaluation surplus
in respect of that asset. The decrease recognized in other comprehensive income reduces
the amount accumulated in equity under the heading of revaluation surplus.
Treatment of revaluation gain and loss is summarized in the below diagram:
Treatment of Revaluation Gain or Loss
First time revaluation
Subsequent revaluation
Increase in the
carrying amount
(CA) of the
revalued asset
Recognize
the
revaluation
gain in OCI
Decrease in the
carrying amount
(CA) of the
revalued asset
Recognize the
revaluation
loss in P & L
Yes
Increase in CA of the
revalued asset
Was there a
previous increase
in CA of the
revalued asset?
Yes
No
Recognize
the
Recognize
Recognize
the
revaluation gain in P & L
to the extent that it
the
revaluation
revaluation
reverses a revaluation
loss in P & L
gain in OCI
decrease of the same
asset
previously
recognized in P&L
Remaining increase to be
recognized in OCI
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Decrease in CA of
the revalued asset
Was there a
previous
decrease in CA
of the revalued
asset?
No
Recognize the
revaluation loss in
OCI to the extent of
any credit balance
existing in the
revaluation surplus
in respect of that
asset.
Remaining decrease to
be recognized in P & L
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.65
The revaluation surplus included in equity in respect of an item of property, plant and equipment
may be transferred directly to retained earnings when the asset is derecognized. This may involve
transferring the whole of the surplus when the asset is retired or disposed of.
However, some of the surplus may be transferred as the asset is used by an entity. In such a case,
the amount of the surplus transferred would be the difference between depreciation based on the
revalued carrying amount of the asset and depreciation based on the asset's original cost. Transfers
from revaluation surplus to retained earnings are not made through profit or loss.
The effects of taxes on income, if any, resulting from the revaluation of property, plant and equipment
are recognized and disclosed in accordance with Ind AS 12, Income Taxes.
Illustration 5: Utilisation of Revaluation Surplus
An item of PPE was purchased for  9,00,000 on 1st April, 20X1. It is estimated to have a useful
life of 10 years and is depreciated on a straight-line basis. On 1st April, 20X3, the asset is revalued
to ₹9,60,000. The useful life remains unchanged as ten years. Ignore impact of deferred taxes.
Calculate depreciation and revaluation surplus for 20X3-20X4 as per Ind AS 16.
Solution
In the profit or loss for 20X3-20X4, a depreciation expense of 1,20,000 will be charged. A reserve
transfer, which will be shown in the statement of changes in equity, may be undertaken as follows:
The closing balance on the revaluation surplus on 31st March, 20X4 will therefore be as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.66
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.6.4 Depreciation
The depreciable amount of an asset should be allocated on a systematic basis over its useful
life. The depreciation charge for each period should be recognized in profit or loss unless it
is included in the carrying amount of another asset.
Each part of an item of property, plant and equipment with a cost that is significant in relation
to the total cost of the item should be depreciated separately.
An entity allocates the amount initially recognized in respect of an item of property, plant and
equipment to its significant parts and depreciates separately each such part. For example, it
may be appropriate to depreciate separately the airframe and engines of an aircraft.
A significant part of an item of property, plant and equipment may have a useful life and a
depreciation method that are the same as the useful life and the depreciation method of
another significant part of that same item. Such parts may be grouped in determining the
depreciation charge.
To the extent that an entity depreciates separately some parts of an item of property, plant
and equipment, it also depreciates separately the remainder of the item. The remainder
consists of the parts of the item that are individually not significant. If an entity has varying
expectations for these parts, approximation techniques may be necessary to depreciate the
remainder in a manner that faithfully represents the consumption pattern and/or useful life of
its parts.
Land and buildings are separable assets and are accounted for separately, even when they
are acquired together. With some exceptions, such as quarries and sites used for landfill,
land has an unlimited useful life and therefore is not depreciated. Buildings have a limited
useful life and therefore are depreciable assets. An increase in the value of the land on which
a building stands does not affect the determination of the depreciable amount of the building.
If the cost of land includes the costs of site dismantlement, removal and restoration, that
portion of the land asset is depreciated over the period of benefits obtained by incurring those
costs.
In some cases, the land itself may have a limited useful life, in which case it is depreciated in
a manner that reflects the benefits to be derived from it.
2.6.4.1 Residual Value
The residual value and the useful life of an asset should be reviewed at least at each financial year-
end and, if expectations differ from previous estimates, the change(s) should be accounted for as a
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.67
change in an accounting estimate in accordance with Ind AS 8, Accounting Policies, Changes in
Accounting Estimates and Errors.
Illustration 6: Revision of Useful Life
An asset which cost 10,000 was estimated to have a useful life of 10 years and residual value
2000. After two years, useful life was revised to 4 remaining years.
Calculate the depreciation charge for the years 1,2,3.
Solution:
₹
*****
The residual value of an asset may increase to an amount equal to or greater than the asset's
carrying amount. If it does, the asset's depreciation charge is zero unless and until its residual
value subsequently decreases to an amount below the asset's carrying amount.
Depreciation is recognized even if the fair value of the asset exceeds its carrying amount, as
long as the asset's residual value does not exceed its carrying amount. Repair and
maintenance of an asset do not negate the need to depreciate it.
2.6.4.2 Commencement of depreciation
Depreciation of an asset begins when it is available for use, i.e. when it is in the location and
condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
2.6.4.3 Cessation of depreciation
Depreciation of an asset ceases at the earlier of:
(a)
(b)
the date that the asset is classified as held for sale (or included in a disposal group
that is classified as held for sale) in accordance with Ind AS 105.
and the date that the asset is derecognized.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.68
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Therefore, depreciation does not cease when the asset becomes idle or is retired from active
use unless the asset is fully depreciated. However, under usage methods of depreciation the
depreciation charge can be zero while there is no production.
2.6.4.4 Factors affecting the useful life of an asset
The future economic benefits embodied in an asset are consumed by an entity principally through
its use. However, other factors, such as technical or commercial obsolescence and wear and tear
while an asset remains idle, often result in the diminution of the economic benefits that might have
been obtained from the asset. Consequently, all the following factors are considered in determining
the useful life of an asset:
(a)
(b)
(c)
expected usage of the asset. Usage is assessed by reference to the asset's expected
capacity or physical output;
expected physical wear and tear, which depends on operational factors such as the number
of shifts for which the asset is to be used and the repair and maintenance programme, and
the care and maintenance of the asset while idle;
technical or commercial obsolescence arising from changes or improvements in production,
or from a change in the market demand for the product or service output of the asset.
Expected future reductions in the selling price of an item that was produced using an asset
could indicate the expectation of technical or commercial obsolescence of the asset, which,
in turn, might reflect a reduction of the future economic benefits embodied in the asset; and
(d) legal or similar limits on the use of the asset, such as the expiry dates of related leases.
2.6.4.5 Impact of an entity's asset management policy
The useful life of an asset is defined in terms of the asset's expected utility to the entity. The asset
management policy of the entity may involve the disposal of assets after a specified time or after
consumption of a specified proportion of the future economic benefits embodied in the asset.
Therefore, the useful life of an asset may be shorter than its economic life. The estimation of the
useful life of the asset is a matter of judgement based on the experience of the entity with similar
assets.
2.6.4.6 Depreciation method
The depreciation method used shall reflect the pattern in which the asset's future economic benefits
are expected to be consumed by the entity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.69
The depreciation method applied to an asset is reviewed at least at each financial year-end and, if
there has been a significant change in the expected pattern of consumption of the future economic
benefits embodied in the asset, the method should be changed to reflect the changed pattern. Such
a change is accounted for as a change in an accounting estimate in accordance with Ind AS 8.
Illustration 7: Change in Depreciation Method
An entity acquired an asset 3 years ago at a cost of 5 million. The depreciation method adopted
for the asset was 10 percent reducing balance method.
At the end of Year 3, the entity estimates that the remaining useful life of the asset is 8 years and
determines to adopt straight -line method from that date so as to reflect the revised estimated
pattern of recovery of economic benefits.
Calculate the depreciation charge for respective years in accordance with Ind AS 16.
Solution
Change in depreciation method shall be accounted for as a change in an accounting estimate in
accordance with Ind AS 8 and hence will have a prospective effect.
Depreciation charges for year 1 to 11 will be as follows:
Working Note:
Year 3 onwards method of depreciation has been changed from reducing balance method to straight
line method for which it is assessed that the remaining useful life is 8 years. Hence revised
depreciation would be calculated as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.70
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Revised depreciation as per straight line method
= (Carrying amount as at the end of the $3^{rd}$ year - Residual value) / Remaining useful life
$=36,45,000/8$ years = 4,55,625 per annum (for year 4 to year 11)
*****
A variety of depreciation methods can be used to allocate the depreciable amount of an asset on a
systematic basis over its useful life. These methods include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Straight-line depreciation method results in a constant charge over the useful life if the asset's
residual value does not change.
Diminishing balance method results in a decreasing charge over the useful life.
Units of production method results in a charge based on the expected use or output.
The entity selects the method that most closely reflects the expected pattern of consumption of the
future economic benefits embodied in the asset. That method is applied consistently from period to
period unless there is a change in the expected pattern of consumption of those future economic
benefits.
A depreciation method that is based on revenue that is generated by an activity that includes the
use of an asset is not appropriate. The revenue generated by an activity that includes the use of an
asset generally reflects factors other than the consumption of the economic benefits of the asset
(e.g. revenue is affected by other inputs and processes, selling activities and changes in sales
volumes and prices). The price component of revenue may be affected by inflation, which has no
bearing upon the way in which an asset is consumed.
Depreciation
Fair Value > Carrying Amount
(Residual Value is less than
Carrying Amount)
Residual Value > =
Carrying Amount
Depreciation
Charged
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Depreciation
Zero
Asset not usable or held for sale
or included in a disposal group
that is classified as held for sale
Depreciation
Ceases
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.71
2.6.5 Impairment
2.6.5.1 Identification of an impairment loss
To determine whether an item of property, plant and equipment is impaired, an entity applies
Ind AS 36, Impairment of Assets. Ind AS 36 explains how an entity reviews the carrying amount of
its assets, how it determines the recoverable amount of an asset, and when it recognizes, or
reverses the recognition of, an impairment loss.
2.6.5.2 Compensation for impairment
Compensation from third parties for items of property, plant and equipment that were
impaired, lost or given up shall be included in profit or loss when the compensation becomes
receivable.
Impairments or losses of items of property, plant and equipment, related claims for or
payments of compensation from third parties and any subsequent purchase or construction
of replacement assets are separate economic events and are accounted for separately as
follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
impairments of items of property, plant and equipment are recognized in accordance
with Ind AS 36;
derecognition of items of property, plant and equipment retired or disposed of is
determined in accordance with this Standard;
compensation from third parties for items of property, plant and equipment that were
impaired, lost or given up is included in determining profit or loss when it becomes
receivable; and
the cost of items of property, plant and equipment restored, purchased or constructed
as replacements is determined in accordance with this Standard.
2.7 DERECOGNITION
2.7.1 Derecognition- general
The carrying amount of an item of property, plant and equipment should be derecognized:
(a) on disposal; or
(b)
when no future economic benefits are expected from its use or disposal.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.72
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The gain or loss arising from the derecognition of an item of property, plant and equipment is
included in profit or loss when the item is derecognized (unless Ind AS 116 requires otherwise
on a sale and leaseback). Gains shall not be classified as revenue.
However, an entity that, in the course of its ordinary activities, routinely sells items of property,
plant and equipment that it has held for rental to others shall transfer such assets to
inventories at their carrying amount when they cease to be rented and become held for sale.
The proceeds from the sale of such assets shall be recognized as revenue in accordance
with Ind AS 115, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
The date of disposal of an item of property, plant and equipment is the date the recipient
obtains control of that item in accordance with Ind AS 115. Ind AS 116 applies to disposal
by a sale and leaseback.
If, under the recognition principle, an entity recognizes in the carrying amount of an item of
property, plant and equipment the cost of a replacement for part of the item, then it
derecognizes the carrying amount of the replaced part regardless of whether the replaced
part had been depreciated separately. If it is not practicable for an entity to determine the
carrying amount of the replaced part, it may use the cost of the replacement as an indication
of what the cost of the replaced part was at the time it was acquired or constructed.
The gain or loss arising from the derecognition of an item of property, plant and equipment
shall be determined as the difference between the net disposal proceeds, if any, and the
carrying amount of the item.
The date of disposal of an item of property, plant and equipment is the date the recipient
obtains control of that item in accordance with the requirements for determining when a
performance obligation is satisfied in Ind AS 115. Ind AS 116 applies to disposal by a sale
and leaseback.
The amount of consideration to be included in the gain or loss arising from the derecognition
of an item of property, plant and equipment is determined in accordance with the
requirements for determining the transaction price in Ind AS 115.
Subsequent changes to the estimated amount of the consideration included in the gain or
loss shall be accounted for in accordance with the requirements for changes in the transaction
price in Ind AS 115.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.73
2.8 DISCLOSURE
2.8.1 Disclosure- general
The financial statements shall disclose, for each class of property, plant and equipment:
(a)
the measurement bases used for determining the gross carrying amount;
(b)
the depreciation methods used;
(c)
the useful lives or the depreciation rates used; and
(d)
the gross carrying amount and the accumulated depreciation (aggregated with
accumulated impairment losses) at the beginning and end of the period.
Entity is also required to provide a reconciliation of the carrying amount at the beginning and
end of the period showing:
(a)
additions;
(b)
assets classified as held for sale or included in a disposal group classified as held for
sale in accordance with Ind AS 105 and other disposals;
(c)
acquisitions through business combinations;
(d)
(e)
increases or decreases resulting from revaluations and from impairment losses
recognized or reversed in other comprehensive income in accordance with Ind AS 36;
impairment losses recognized in profit or loss in accordance with Ind AS 36;
(f)
impairment losses reversed in profit or loss in accordance with Ind AS 36;
(g)
depreciation;
(h)
the net exchange differences arising on the translation of the financial statements from
the functional currency into a different presentation currency, including the translation
of a foreign operation into the presentation currency of the reporting entity; and
(i)
other changes.
The financial statements shall also disclose:
(a)
the existence and amounts of restrictions on title, and property, plant and equipment
pledged as security for liabilities;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.74
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
the amount of expenditures recognized in the carrying amount of an item of property,
plant and equipment in the course of its construction;
the amount of contractual commitments for the acquisition of property, plant and
equipment; and
(d)
if it is not disclosed separately in the statement of profit and loss, the amount of
compensation from third parties for items of property, plant and equipment that were
impaired, lost or given up that is included in profit or loss.
Selection of the depreciation method and estimation of the useful life of assets are matters
of judgement. Therefore, disclosure of the methods adopted and the estimated useful lives
or depreciation rates provides users of financial statements with information that allows them
to review the policies selected by management and enables comparisons to be made with
other entities. For similar reasons, it is necessary to disclose:
(a)
(b)
depreciation, whether recognized in profit or loss or as a part of the cost of other
assets, during a period; and
accumulated depreciation at the end of the period.
In accordance with Ind AS 8 an entity discloses the nature and effect of a change in an
accounting estimate that has an effect in the current period or is expected to have an effect
in subsequent periods. For property, plant and equipment, such disclosure may arise from
changes in estimates with respect to:
the estimated costs of dismantling, removing or restoring items of property, plant and
equipment;
(a)
residual values;
(b)
(c)
useful lives; and
(d)
depreciation methods
2.8.2 Items stated at revalued amounts
If items of property, plant and equipment are stated at revalued amounts, the following should
be disclose:
(a)
the effective date of the revaluation;
(b)
whether an independent valuer was involved;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.75
(c)
for each revalued class of property, plant and equipment, the carrying amount that
would have been recognized had the assets been carried under the cost model; and
(d)
the revaluation surplus, indicating the change for the period and any restrictions on
the distribution of the balance to shareholders.
2.8.3 Additional recommended disclosure
Entities are encouraged but not required, to disclose the following amounts:
(a)
the carrying amount of temporarily idle property, plant and equipment;
(b)
the gross carrying amount of any fully depreciated property, plant and equipment that
is still in use;
(c)
(d)
Illustration 8
the carrying amount of property, plant and equipment retired from active use and not
classified as held for sale in accordance with Ind AS 105; and
when the cost model is used, the fair value of property, plant and equipment when this
is materially different from the carrying amount.
MS Ltd. has acquired a heavy machinery at a cost of  1,00,00,000 (with no breakdown of the
component parts). The estimated useful life is 10 years. At the end of the sixth year, one of the
major components, the turbine requires replacement, as further maintenance is uneconomical.
The remainder of the machine is perfect and is expected to last for the next four years. The cost
of a new turbine is ₹45,00,000. The discount rate assumed is 5%.
Analyse whether the cost of the new turbine can be recognized as an asset, and, if yes, then apply
the accounting treatment relevant to it.
Solution
The new turbine will produce economic benefits to MS Ltd., and the cost is measurable. Hence, the
item should be recognized as an asset. The original invoice for the machine did not specify the cost
of the turbine; however, the cost of the replacement 45,00,000 can be used as an indication
(usually by discounting) of the likely cost, six years previously.
If an appropriate discount rate is 5% per annum, 45,00,000 discounted back six years amounts to
 33,57,900 [ 45,00,000/(1.05)], i.e., the approximate cost of turbine before 6 years.
The current carrying amount of the turbine which is required to be replaced of 13,43,160 would be
derecognized from the books of account, (i.e., Original Cost 33,57,900 as reduced by accumulated
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.76
FINANCIAL REPORTING
depreciation for past 6 years
20,14,740, assuming depreciation is charged on straight-line basis.)
The cost of the new turbine,
45,00,000 would be added to the cost of machine, resulting in a
revision of carrying amount of machine to 71,56,840. (i.e., ₹ 40,00,000*   13,43,160 +
 45,00,000).
*Original cost of machine 1,00,00,000 reduced by accumulated depreciation (till the end of 6
years) 60,00,000.
*****
Illustration 9
On 1st April, 20X1, XYZ Ltd. acquired a machine under the following terms:
In addition to the above information XYZ Ltd. was granted a trade discount of 10% on the initial
list price of the asset and a settlement discount of 5%, if payment for the machine was received
within one month of purchase. XYZ Ltd. paid for the plant on 20th April, 20X1.
Compute the cost of the asset to be recognized.
Solution
In accordance with Ind AS 16, all costs required to bring an asset to its present location and condition
for its intended use should be capitalized. Therefore, the initial purchase price of the asset should
be
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.77
Maintenance contract is a separate contract to get service, therefore, the maintenance contract cost
of  7,00,000 should be taken as a prepaid expense and charged to the profit or loss over a period
of 5 years.
In addition, the settlement discount received of ₹3,60,000 ( $\mp72,00,000\times5\%)$ is to be shown as
other income in the profit or loss.
*****
Illustration 10
X Limited started construction on a building for its own use on 1st April, 20X0. The following
costs are incurred:
Other relevant information: Material costing 1,00,000 had been spoiled and therefore wasted
and a further 1,50,000 was spent on account of faulty design work. As a result of these
problems, work on the building was stopped for two weeks during November, 20X0 and it is
estimated that 22,000 of the labour cost relate to that period. The building was completed on
1st January, 20X1 and brought in use 1st April, 20X1. X Limited had taken a loan of ₹40,00,000
on 1st April, 20X0 for construction of the building. The loan carried an interest rate of 8% per
annum and is repayable on 1st April, 20X2. Assume that the entity did not considered the
construction period as substantial period of time as per Ind AS 23.
Calculate the cost of the building that will be included in tangible non-current asset as an
addition?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
5.78
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Only those costs which are directly attributable to bringing the asset into working condition for its
intended use should be included. Administration and general costs cannot be included. Cost of
abnormal amount of wasted material/ labor or other resources is not included as per para 22 of
Ind AS 16. Here, the cost of spoilt materials and faulty designs are assumed to be abnormal costs.
Also, it is assumed that the wastages and labor charges incurred are abnormal in nature. Hence,
same are also not included in the cost of PPE.
Amount to be included in Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE):
Illustration 11
*****
XYZ Ltd. purchased an asset on 1st January, 20X0, for  1,00,000 and the asset had an estimated
useful life of ten years and a residual value of nil. The company has charged depreciation using
the straight-line method at
10,000 per annum. On 1st January, 20X4, the management of
XYZ Ltd. reviews the estimated life and decides that the asset will probably be useful for a further
four years and, therefore, the total life is revised to eight years.
Account for the asset for the remaining years.
Solution
Change in useful economic life of an asset is change in accounting estimate, which is to be applied
prospectively, i.e., the depreciation charge will need to be recalculated. On 1st January, 20X4,
when the asset's net book value is 60,000. The company should amend the annual provision
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.79
for depreciation to charge the unamortised cost (namely,  60,000) over the revised remaining life
of four years. Consequently, it should charge depreciation for the next four years at  15,000 per
annum.
*****
Illustration 12
On 1st April, 20X1, Sun Ltd. purchased some land for 10 million (including legal costs of
1 million) in order to construct a new factory. Construction work commenced on 1st May, 20X1.
Sun Ltd incurred the following costs in relation with its construction:
Preparation and levelling of the land  3,00,000.
Purchase of materials for the construction   6.08 million in total.
Employment costs of the construction workers  2,00,000 per month.
Overhead costs incurred directly on the construction of the factory   1,00,000 per month.
Ongoing overhead costs allocated to the construction project using the company's normal
overhead allocation model  ₹50,000 per month.
Income received during the temporary use of the factory premises as a car park during the
construction period – 50,000.
Costs of relocating employees to work at the new factory   3,00,000.
Costs of the opening ceremony on 31st January, 20X2 –  1,50,000.
The factory was completed on 30th November, 20X1 (which is considered as substantial period of
time as per Ind AS 23) and production began on 1st February, 20X2. The overall useful life of the
factory building was estimated at 40 years from the date of completion. However, it is estimated
that the f will need to be replaced 20 years after the date of completion and that the cost of
replacing the roof at current prices would be 30% of the total cost of the building.
At the end of the 40-year period, Sun Ltd has a legally enforceable obligation to demolish the
factory and restore the site to its original condition. The directors estimate that the cost of
demolition in 40 years' time (based on prices prevailing at that time) will be 20 million. An
annual risk adjusted discount rate which is appropriate to this project is 8%. The present value of
1 payable in 40 years' time at an annual discount rate of 8% is  0.046.
The construction of the factory was partly financed by a loan of 17.5 million taken out on
1st April, 20X1. The loan was at an annual rate of interest of 6%. Sun Ltd received investment
income of  100,000 on the temporary investment of the proceeds.
Compute the carrying amount of the factory on the Balance Sheet of Sun Ltd at 31st March, 20X2.
Explain the treatment of all the amounts referred to in this part of the answer.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
5.80
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Computation of the cost of the factory
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.81
*****
IN EXISTING
DECOMMISSIONING,
2.9 CHANGES
RESTORATION AND SIMILAR LIABILITIES (APPENDIX A)
Many entities have obligations to dismantle, remove and restore items of property, plant and
equipment after the end of particular period. The initial estimate of such costs is included in the cost
of an item of property, plant and equipment. For instance, a lessee who has taken an office building
on lease may do some leasehold improvements and may have an obligation under the lease
agreement to dismantle the leasehold improvements at the end of the lease. Such obligations are
referred to as 'decommissioning, restoration and similar liabilities'.
Ind AS 37 contains requirements on how to measure decommissioning, restoration and similar
liabilities. Appendix A to Ind AS 16 provides guidance on how to account for the effect of
changes in the measurement of existing decommissioning, restoration and similar liabilities.
2.9.1 When to apply guidance in Appendix A to Ind AS 16
The guidance in Appendix A to Ind AS 16 applies to changes in the measurement of any existing
de-commissioning, restoration or similar liability that is both:
recognized as part of the cost of an item of property, plant and equipment in accordance with
Ind AS 16 or as part of the cost of a right-of-use asset in accordance with Ind AS 116; and
recognized as a liability in accordance with Ind AS 37.
2.9.2 Issues addressed by Appendix A to Ind AS 16
This Appendix addresses how the effect of the following events that change the measurement
of an existing decommissioning, restoration or similar liability should be accounted for:
(a)
a change in the estimated outflow of resources embodying economic benefits (e.g. cash
flows) required to settle the obligation;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.82
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
a change in the current market-based discount rate as defined in paragraph 47 of Ind AS 37
(this includes changes in the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability); and
an increase that reflects the passage of time (also referred to as the unwinding of the
discount).
2.9.3 Accounting guidance in Appendix A to Ind AS 16
Appendix A to Ind AS 16 offers two different approaches to account for changes in
decommissioning liability depending upon whether the entity follows cost model or
revaluation model.
If the related asset is measured using the cost model:
(a) subject to point (b) below, changes in the decommissioning, restoration and similar
liability shall be added to, or deducted from, the cost of the asset in the current
period and related provision for decommissioning and site restoration is accordingly
adjusted.
(b)
any such decrease in the decommissioning, restoration and similar liability cannot
exceed the carrying amount of the asset. In case, the said decrease in the
decommissioning liability is more than the carrying amount of the asset, the excess
is recognized immediately as income in statement of profit and loss.
(c)
if the changes in the decommissioning liability and the resultant adjustment results
in an addition to the cost of an asset, the entity shall consider whether this is an
indication that the new carrying amount of the asset may not be fully recoverable. If
it is such an indication, the entity shall test the asset for impairment by estimating
its recoverable amount, and shall account for any impairment loss, in accordance
with Ind AS 36.
If the asset is measured using the revaluation model:
(a)
(b)
Any increase in liability arising out of changes in decommissioning liabilities is
adjusted against revaluation surplus to the extent credit balance is available
relating to that particular asset through 'other comprehensive income'. Any
excess is, however, recognized in the statement of profit and loss.
Any decrease in liability arising out of changes in decommissioning liabilities, is
recognized in the revaluation reserve ie equity through 'other comprehensive
income'. However, if there was any revaluation deficit previously charged to profit
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.83
(c)
(d)
(e)
or loss, to that extent it can be recognized as income in the statement of profit and
loss.
If there is decrease in decommissioning liability in excess of the carrying amount
of the asset, such excess is treated as 'deemed revaluation' and is recognized
immediately in the statement of profit and loss.
Any change in liability would require the asset to be tested for impairment to
ascertain if there is any change in fair value.
Change in the revaluation surplus arising from a change in the decommissioning
liability shall be presented as a separate line item in the Statement of Other
Comprehensive Income, as required under Ind AS 1.
The adjusted depreciable amount of the asset is depreciated over its useful life. Therefore,
once the related asset has reached the end of its useful life, all subsequent changes in the
liability shall be recognized in profit or loss as they occur. This applies under both the cost
model and the revaluation model.
The periodic unwinding of the discount shall be recognized in profit or loss as a finance
cost, as it occurs. Capitalisation under Ind AS 23 is not permitted.
Illustration 13
H Limited purchased an item of PPE costing 100 million which has useful life of 10 years. The
entity has a contractual decommissioning and site restoration obligation, estimated at 5 million
to be incurred at the end of 10th year. The current market-based discount rate is 8%.
The company follows SLM method of depreciation. H Limited follows the Cost Model for
accounting of PPE.
Determine the carrying value of an item of PPE and decommissioning liability at each year end
when
(a) There is no change in the expected decommissioning expenses, expected timing of incurring
the decommissioning expense and / or the discount rate
(b) At the end of Year 4, the entity expects that the estimated cash outflow on account of
decommissioning and site restoration to be incurred at the end of the useful life of the asset
will be 8 million (in place of 5 million, estimated in the past).
Determine in case (b), how H Limited need to account for the changes in the decommissioning
liability?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.84
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
The present value of such decommissioning and site restoration obligation at the end of $10^{th}$ year
is 2.32 million [being $5/(1.08)^{10}]$. H Limited will recognize the present value of
decommissioning liability of 2.32 million as an addition to cost of PPE and will also recognize
a corresponding decommissioning liability. Further, the entity will recognize the unwinding of
discount as finance charge.
(a) The following table shows the relevant computations, if there is no change in the expected
decommissioning expenses, expected timing of incurring the decommissioning expense and
/ or the discount rate:
(in million)
(b) The changes to the estimate of expected decommissioning obligation:
The present value of the decommissioning liability at the end of Year 4 works out to
be 5.04 million [being $8/(1.08)^{6}]$.
As against this, the carrying amount of decommissioning liability at the end of Year 4
is 3.15 million (as computed above).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.85
The changes in the decommissioning liability of 1.89 million (being 5.04 million
less 3.15 million) shall be added to the cost of the asset in the current period and
the related provision for decommissioning liability is also adjusted.
The journal entry will be:
PPE
The following table shows the calculations for years 5 - 10:
Note that in the above table:
Opening amount of PPE at the beginning of Year 5 is computed as
63.28
million (being carrying amount of 61.39 million at the end of Year 4 plus
increase of 1.89 million arising due to increase in the present value of the
decommissioning liability at the end of Year 4).
The revised carrying amount of PPE (at 63.28 million) at the beginning of
Year 5 will be depreciated over the balance 6 years of the useful life).
Opening decommissioning liability at the beginning of Year 5 is computed as
5.04 million (being carrying amount of 3.15 million at the end of Year 4 plus
increase of 1.89 million).
Since the entity has adjusted the increase in the decommissioning liability against the
carrying amount of PPE, it needs to evaluate whether the new carrying amount (in this
case, 63.28 million) is recoverable. If not, it will give rise to impairment loss, to be
accounted for under Ind AS 36.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
5.86
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.10 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Cummins India Limited'
for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Property, Plant and Equipment' and its accounting
policy thereon.
BALANCE SHEET AS AT MARCH 31, 2022
Particulars
ASSETS
Non-current assets
Property, plant and equipment
2.1 Property, plant and equipment (PPE)
Notes No.
As at
March 31, 2022
2.1
115,362
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.87
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Property, plant and equipment and investment properties
Property plant and equipment, capital work in progress and investment properties are stated at
cost of acquisition or construction net of accumulated depreciation and impairment loss (if any).
All significant costs relating to the acquisition and installation of property plant and equipment/
investment properties are capitalised. Subsequent costs are included in the asset's carrying
amount or recognized as a separate asset, as appropriate, only when it is probable that future
economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Company and the cost of the item can
be measured reliably. The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognized. All other
repairs and maintenance are charged to the Statement of Profit and Loss during the financial
period in which they are incurred.
When significant parts of plant and equipment are required to be replaced at intervals, the
Company depreciate them separately based on their specific useful lives.
Depreciation is computed on straight line method based on useful lives, determined based on
internal technical evaluation, as follows:
Assets
Roads
Useful life
10 years
Office building and investment properties
Upto 60 years
Factory building
30 years
3 to 15 years
5 to 10 years
8 to 9 years
Plant and machinery
Furniture and fittings
Vehicles
The assets' residual values and useful lives are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, at the end
of each reporting period.
Freehold land is carried at cost. Losses arising from the retirement of, and gains and losses
arising from disposal of property, plant and equipment which are carried at cost are recognized
in the Statement of Profit and Loss.
Leasehold improvements are amortised on straight line basis over the period of lease.
Transfers are made to investment properties only when there is a change in use. Transfers
between investment property and owner-occupied property do not change the carrying amount
of the property transferred and they do not change the cost of that property for measurement or
disclosure purposes.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - Cummins India Limited)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.88
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.11 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 16 VIS-À-VIS
AS 10
2.12 CARVE OUT IN IND AS 16 VIS-À-VIS IAS 16
Para 17(e) of Ind AS 16 has been amended (through a notification by MCA on 23rd March, 2022) by
adding a clarification that the excess of net proceeds from sale of items produced during testing will
not be credited to Profit or loss i.e. it will be deducted from the cost of an item of property, plant and
equipment.
However, an amendment made in IAS 16 by IASB prohibited deduction of proceeds of items
produced during testing from cost of an item of property, plant and equipment.
This differential treatment in IAS 16 and Ind AS 16 has led to a carve out, which will have
consequential impact on depreciation, impairment, and deferred tax.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.89
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
Questions
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1.
ABC Ltd. is installing a new plant at its production facility. It has incurred these costs:
2.
3.
Advise ABC Ltd. on the costs that can be capitalized in accordance with Ind AS 16.
A Ltd. has an item of property, plant and equipment with an initial cost of 1,00,000. At the
date of revaluation, accumulated depreciation amounted to 55,000. The fair value of the
asset, by reference to transactions in similar assets, is assessed to be  65,000.
Pass journal entries with regard to revaluation.
B Ltd. owns an asset with an original cost of 2,00,000. On acquisition, management
determined that the useful life was 10 years and the residual value would be 20,000. The
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.90
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
5.
6.
asset is now 8 years old, and during this time there have been no revisions to the assessed
residual value.
At the end of year 8, management has reviewed the useful life and residual value and has
determined that the useful life can be extended to 12 years in view of the maintenance
program adopted by the company. As a result, the residual value will reduce to  10,000.
Analyze how would the above changes in estimates be accounted by B Ltd.
X Ltd. has a machine which got damaged due to fire as on 31st January, 20X1. The carrying
amount of machine was 1,00,000 on that date. X Ltd. sold the damaged asset as scrap for
10,000. X Ltd. has insured the same asset against damage. As on 31st March, 20X1, the
compensation proceedings were still in process but the insurance company has confirmed
the claim. Compensation of 50,000 is receivable from the insurance company.
Determine the accounting for the above transaction for X Ltd.
An entity has a nuclear power plant and a related decommissioning liability. The nuclear
power plant started operating on 1st April, 2XX1. The plant has a useful life of 40 years. Its
initial cost was 1,20,000 which included an amount for decommissioning costs of 10,000,
which represented 70,400 in estimated cash flows payable in 40 years discounted at a risk-
adjusted rate of 5 per cent. The entity's financial year ends on $31^{st}$ March. After 10 years,
the net present value of the decommissioning liability has decreased by  8,000. The
discount rate has not yet changed.
Examine how the entity will account for the above changes in decommissioning liability in the
11th year, if it adopts cost model.
An entity has a nuclear power plant and a related decommissioning liability. The nuclear
power plant started operating on 1st April, 20X1. The plant has a useful life of 40 years. Its
initial cost was  1,20,000. This included an amount for decommissioning costs of 10,000,
which represented 70,400 in estimated cash flows payable in 40 years discounted at a risk-
adjusted rate of 5 per cent. The entity's financial year ends on $31^{st}$ March. Assume that a
market-based discounted cash flow valuation of 1,15,000 is obtained at $31^{st}$ March, 20X4.
This valuation is after deduction of an allowance of
11,600 for decommissioning costs,
which represents no change to the original estimate, after the unwinding of three years'
discount. On $31^{st}$ March, 20X5, the entity estimates that, as a result of technological
advances, the present value of the decommissioning liability has decreased by  5,000. The
entity decides that a full valuation of the asset is needed at $31^{st}$ March, 20X5, in order to
ensure that the carrying amount does not differ materially from fair value. The asset is now
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.91
7.
valued at 1,07,000, which is net of an allowance for the reduced decommissioning
obligation.
Examine how will the entity account for the above changes in decommissioning liability if it
adopts revaluation model.
A Ltd. purchased some Property, Plant and Equipment on 1st April, 20X1, and estimated their
useful lives for the purpose of financial statements prepared on the basis of Ind AS. Following
were the original cost, and useful life of the various components of property, plant, and
equipment assessed on 1st April, 20X1:
A Ltd. uses the straight-line method of depreciation. On 1st April, 20X4, the entity reviewed
the following useful lives of the property, plant, and equipment through an external valuation
expert:
There were no salvage values for the three components of the property, plant, and equipment
either initially or at the time the useful lives were revised.
Examine the impact of revaluation of useful life on the Statement of Profit and Loss for the
year ending 31st March, 20X5.
Answers
1. According to Ind AS 16, these costs can be capitalized:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.92
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Note: Interest charges paid on "Deferred credit terms" to the supplier of the plant (not a
qualifying asset) of  2,00,000 and operating losses before commercial production amounting
to 4,00,000 are not regarded as directly attributable costs and thus cannot be capitalized.
They should be written off to the Statement of Profit and Loss in the period they are incurred.
2.
The entries to be passed would be:
Note: The net result is that the asset has a carrying amount of 65,000 [1,00,000 – 55,000
+ 20,000.]
3.
Calculation of accumulated depreciation till 8th year
Depreciable amount {Cost less residual value} $=\mathbb{\pi}2,00,000-\mathbb{\pi}20,000=\mathbb{\pi}1,80,000.$
$=1,80,000/10=\overline{\pi}18,000.$
4.
Annual depreciation = Depreciable amount / Useful life
Accumulated depreciation $=18,000\times No.$ of years (8) =  1,44,000.
Calculation of carrying amount at the end of the 8th year
The asset has a carrying amount of 56,000 at the end of year 8 [ie.  2,00,000   1,44,000]
Accounting of the changes in estimates
Revision of the useful life to 12 years results in a remaining useful life of 4 years (ie 12 years
- 8 years).
The revised depreciable amount is  46,000 (56,000  ₹10,000)
Thus, depreciation should be charged in future ie from 9th year onwards at 11,500 per
annum (46,000 / 4 years).
As per para 66 of Ind AS 16, impairment or losses of items of property, plant and equipment
and related claims for or payments of compensation from third parties are separate economic
events and should be accounted for separately.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.93
5.
X Ltd. should account for the above transaction as given below:
At the time of sale of scrap machine, X Ltd. should write off the carrying amount of asset from
books of account and provide a loss of  90,000. (i.e., carrying amount of  1,00,000
realised amount of  10,000)
As on 31st March, 20X1, X Ltd. should recognize income of 50,000 against the
compensation receivable in its profit or loss.
On 31st March, 2X11, the plant is 10 years old. Accumulated depreciation is 30,000
(*120,000 x 10 / 40 years). Due to unwinding of discount @ 5%
over the 10 years, the
16,300 (approx.).
amount of decommissioning liability has increased from  10,000 to
On 31st March, 2X11, the discount rate has not changed. However, the entity estimates that,
as a result of technological advances, the net present value of the decommissioning liability
has decreased by 8,000. Accordingly, the entity adjusts the decommissioning liability from
16,300 to 8,300. On this date, the entity passes the following journal entry to reflect the
change:
6.
Provision for decommissioning liability Dr.
To Asset
₹
8,000
₹
8,000
Following this adjustment, the carrying amount of the asset is 82,000 (₹ 1,20,000 – ₹ 8,000
30,000), which will be depreciated over the remaining 30 years of the asset's life giving
a depreciation expense for the next year of 2,733 ( 82,000 / 30). The next year's finance
cost for unwinding of discount will be  415 ( 8,300 × 5 per cent).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.94
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Notes:
(1) When accounting for revalued assets to which decommissioning liabilities attach, it is
important to understand the basis of the valuation obtained. For example:
(2)
(3)
(a) if an asset is valued on a discounted cash flow basis, some valuers may value
the asset without deducting any allowance for decommissioning costs (a
'gross' valuation), whereas others may value the asset after deducting an
allowance for decommissioning costs (a 'net' valuation), because an entity
acquiring the asset will generally also assume the decommissioning
obligation. For financial reporting purposes, the decommissioning obligation
is recognized as a separate liability and is not deducted from the asset.
Accordingly, if the asset is valued on a net basis, it is necessary to adjust the
valuation obtained by adding back the allowance for the liability, so that the
liability is not counted twice.
(b)
if an asset is valued on a depreciated replacement cost basis, the valuation
obtained may not include an amount for the decommissioning component of the
asset. If it does not, an appropriate amount will need to be added to the
valuation to reflect the depreciated replacement cost of that component.
Since, the asset is valued on a net basis, it is necessary to adjust the valuation
obtained by adding back the allowance for the liability. Valuation obtained of
1,15,000 plus decommissioning costs of 11,600, allowed for in the valuation
but recognized as a separate liability = 1,26,600.
Three years' depreciation on original cost $7,20,000\times3/40=\overline{\times}9,000$ plus cumulative
discount on 10,000 at 5 per cent compound $=\overline{\times}1,600$ total 10,600.
Revalued amount 1,26,600 less previous net book value of  1,11,000 (cost
120,000 less accumulated depreciation 9,000).
12,200.
The depreciation expense for 20X4-20X5 is therefore 3,420 (1,26,600 x 1 / 37) and the
discount expense for 20X5 is 600 $(11,600\times5\%=580$ or 600 (to the nearest 100). On
31st March, 20X5, the decommissioning liability (before any adjustment) is
However, as per the estimate of the entity, the present value of the decommissioning liability
has decreased by  5,000. Accordingly, the entity adjusts the decommissioning liability from
12,200 to 7,200.
The whole of this adjustment is taken to revaluation surplus, because it does not exceed the
carrying amount that would have been recognized had the asset been carried under the cost
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 16
5.95
model. If it had been done, the excess would have been taken to profit or loss. The entity
makes the following journal entry to reflect the change:
As at 31st March, 20X5, the entity revalued its asset at  1,07,000, which is net of an
allowance of 7,200 for the reduced decommissioning obligation that should be recognized
as a separate liability. The valuation of the assets for financial reporting purposes, before
deducting this allowance, is therefore  1,14,200. The following additional journal entry is
needed:
Notes:
(1)
Eliminating accumulated depreciation of 3,420 in accordance with the entity's
accounting policy.
(2)
The debit is to revaluation surplus because the deficit arising on the revaluation does
not exceed the credit balance existing in the revaluation surplus in respect of the asset.
(3)
Previous valuation (before allowance for decommissioning costs)
cumulative depreciation 3,420, less new valuation (before
decommissioning costs) 1,14,200.
1,26,600, less
allowance for
Following this valuation, the amounts included in the balance sheet are:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.96
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Notes:
(1)
10,600 at 31st March, 20X4, plus depreciation expense of 3,420 and discount
expense of $\overline{\times}600=\overline{\times}14,620$
(2)
15,600 at 31st March, 20X4, plus 5,000 arising on the decrease in the liability, less
8,980 deficit on revaluation $=\mathbb{\times}11,620$.
7.
The annual depreciation charges prior to the change in useful life were
The revised annual depreciation for the year ending 31st March, 20X5, would be
The impact on Statement of Profit and Loss for the year ending 31st March, 20X5
$=\mathbb{\pi}26,00,000-\mathbb{\pi}25,00,000=\mathbb{\pi}1,00,000$
This is a change in accounting estimate which is adjusted prospectively in the period in which
the estimate is amended and, if relevant, to future periods if they are also affected.
Accordingly, from 20X4-20X5 onward, excess of 1,00,000 will be charged in the Statement
of Profit and Loss every year till the time there is any further revision.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
