5.97
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
UNIT 3:
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23:
BORROWING COSTS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
Identify the core principle and scope of the standard
Define borrowing cost, qualifying asset and other related terms
Examine various conditions and pre-conditions for capitalisation of
borrowing costs
Recognize suspension and cessation of capitalization of borrowing cost
Comply with the disclosure requirements of the standard
Differentiate between Ind AS 23 and AS 16.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.98
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT OVERVIEW
Disclosures
Core Principle
Capitalisation of borrowing
costs that are directly
attributable to the acquisition,
construction or production of a
qualifying asset
Scope - Exclusions
• qualifying asset measured at
fair value
• inventories produced in large
quantities
• actual or imputed cost of
equity
Period of capitalisation:
# Commencement
# Suspension
# Cessation
Borrowing costs eligible for
capitalisaion
• Specific borrowings
• General borrowings
• Calculation of capitalisation
rate
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
5.99
3.1 CORE PRINCIPLE
The core principle of Ind AS 23 states that:
a.
b.
Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of
a qualifying asset are included in the cost of that asset i.e. must be capitalised.
Other borrowing costs are recognized as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Borrowing Costs
Interest and other
costs
Other borrowing
costs
Capitalised as part
of cost of asset if
directly attributable
to
Recognized as
expense when
incurred
Acquisition of
qualifying asset
Construction of
qualifying asset
Production of
qualifying asset
3.2 SCOPE OF THE STANDARD
An entity shall apply this standard in accounting for borrowing costs.
The Standard does not apply to actual or imputed cost of equity, including preferred capital
not classified as a liability.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.100
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 1
Dividend paid on equity shares, cost of issuance of equity shares, cost of preference share
capital (not classified as liability as per Ind AS 32) will not be included as borrowing cost
within the purview of this standard.
The general requirement of this standard (to capitalise directly attributable borrowings cost)
is not required to be applied to:
(a)
qualifying assets that are measured at fair value, for example, a biological asset
accounted for under Ind AS 41 - If the assets are held under fair value model with
all changes going to statement of profit or loss, then capitalisation would not affect
measurement in the balance sheet and would involve only reallocation between
finance cost and fair value movement in the Statement of profit and loss.
(b)
inventories that are manufactured, or otherwise produced, in large quantities on
a repetitive basis  This exemption acknowledges the difficulty both in allocating
borrowing costs to such inventories and monitoring those borrowing costs until the
inventories are sold.
3.3 KEY DEFINITIONS
Following are the terms defined in the standard:
1.
Borrowing costs: These are interest and other costs that an entity incurs in connection with
the borrowing of funds. Borrowing costs may include:
•
•
•
interest expense calculated using the effective interest rate method as described in
Ind AS 109 Financial Instruments;
interest in respect of lease liabilities recognized in accordance with Ind AS 116,
Leases; and
exchange differences arising from foreign currency borrowings to the extent that they
are regarded as an adjustment to interest costs
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Interest expense
5.101
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
• Calculated using the effective interest
method as described in Ind AS 109
Interest in respect of
lease liabilities
• Recognized in accordance with Ind AS 116
Exchange differences
arising from foreign
currency borrowings
Recognized to the extent that
they are regarded as an
adjustment to interest costs
2.
Qualifying asset: Qualifying asset is an asset that necessarily takes a substantial period of
time to get ready for its intended use or sale. Examples of qualifying assets are
manufacturing plants, real estate and infrastructure assets such as bridges and railways etc.
Ind AS 23 does not provide any guidance on what constitutes a 'substantial period of time'.
The specific facts and circumstances should be considered in each case. For example, it is
likely that a period of twelve months or more might be considered 'substantial'.
Depending on the circumstances, any of the following may be qualifying assets:
(a)
inventories
(b)
manufacturing plants
(c)
power generation facilities
(d)
intangible assets
(e)
investment properties
(f)
bearer plants.
Financial assets and inventories that are manufactured, or otherwise produced, over a short
period of time, are not qualifying assets.
Assets that are ready for their intended use or sale when acquired are not qualifying assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.102
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Qualifying asset
• Takes
substantial
period of time to get
ready for its intended
use or sale.
Includes
• Inventories
• Manufacturing plant
• Power
facilities
generation
• Intangible assets
• Bearer plants
Excludes
• Inventories produced
in large quantities on
repititive basis
• Assets ready for
intended use or sale
when acquired
• Financial assets
Illustration 1
A company deals in production of dairy products. It prepares and sells various milk products like
ghee, butter and cheese. The company borrowed funds from bank for manufacturing operation.
The cheese takes substantial longer period to get ready for sale.
State whether borrowing costs incurred to finance the production of inventories (cheese) that have
a long production period, be capitalised?
Solution
Ind AS 23 does not require the capitalisation of borrowing costs for inventories that are
manufactured in large quantities on a repetitive basis. However, interest capitalisation is
permitted as long as the production cycle takes a 'substantial period of time', as with cheese.
*****
Illustration 2
A company is in the process of developing computer software. The asset has been qualified for
recognition purposes. However, the development of computer software will take substantial period
of time to complete.
(i)
(ii)
Evaluate whether computer software can be termed as a 'qualifying asset' under Ind AS
23?
Analyse whether management intention should be considered for assessment of the asset
as a qualifying asset?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.103
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
Solution
(i)
Yes. An intangible asset that takes a substantial period of time to get ready for its intended
use or sale is a 'qualifying asset'. This would be the case for an internally generated
computer software in the development phase when it takes a 'substantial period of time' to
complete.
(ii) Yes. Management should assess whether an asset, at the date of acquisition, is 'ready for
its intended use or sale'. The asset might be a qualifying asset, depending on how
management intends to use it. For example, when an acquired asset can only be used in
combination with a larger group of fixed assets or was acquired specifically for the
construction of one specific qualifying asset, the assessment of whether the acquired asset
is a qualifying asset is made on a combined basis.
*****
Illustration 3
A telecom company has acquired a 3G license. The licence could be sold or licensed to a third
party. However, management intends to use it to operate a wireless network. Development of the
network starts when the license is acquired.
Identify whether the borrowing costs on the acquisition of the 3G license be capitalised until the
network is ready for its intended use.
Solution
Yes. The license has been exclusively acquired to operate the wireless network. The fact that
the license can be used or licensed to a third party is irrelevant. The acquisition of the license is
the first step in a wider investment project (developing the network). It is part of the network
investment, which meets the definition of a qualifying asset under Ind AS 23.
*****
Illustration 4
A real estate company has incurred expenses for the acquisition of a permit allowing the
construction of a building. It has also acquired equipment that will be used for the construction of
various buildings.
Examine whether the borrowing costs on the acquisition of the permit and the equipment be
capitalised until the construction of the building is complete.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.104
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
With respect to Permit
Yes, since permit is specific to one building. It is the first step in a wider investment project. It is
part of the construction cost of the building, which meets the definition of a qualifying asset.
With respect to Equipment
No, since the equipment will be used for other construction projects. It is ready for its 'intended
use' at the acquisition date. Hence, it does not meet the definition of a qualifying asset.
*****
Illustration 5
Is interest on a lease of a qualifying asset capitalised as borrowing costs?
Solution
Yes, interest incurred for a lease is specific to an asset. Interest is capitalised if the asset is a
qualifying asset or is used solely for the construction of a qualifying asset. For example, a crane or
a dockyard is leased for the purpose of constructing a ship. The ship is a qualifying asset. The
interest on the lease of the crane or dockyard is capitalised as borrowing costs. Borrowing costs on
the lease can only be capitalised up to the point when the construction of the qualifying asset is
complete.
*****
3.4 EXCHANGE
DIFFERENCE TO BE INCLUDED IN
BORROWING COSTS
The extent to which exchange differences can be considered as borrowing cost depends on the
terms and conditions of the foreign currency borrowing.
The gains and losses that are an adjustment to interest costs include the interest rate differential
between borrowing costs that would be incurred if the entity borrowed funds in its functional currency
and borrowing costs actually incurred on foreign currency borrowings. An entity may borrow funds
in a currency that is not its functional currency e.g. A Company with INR functional currency may
take US dollar loan for financing asset development project in a company.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.105
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
This may have been done on the basis that, over the period of the development of asset, the
borrowing costs, even after allowing for exchange differences, were expected to be less than the
interest cost of an equivalent INR loan.
Following approach is to be followed for determining the extent to which the exchange difference
should be treated as borrowing costs:
(i) the adjustment should be of an amount which is equivalent to the extent to which the
exchange loss does not exceed the difference between the cost of borrowing in functional
currency when compared to the cost of borrowing in a foreign currency.
(ii)
where there is an unrealised exchange loss which is treated as an adjustment to interest and
subsequently there is a realised or unrealised gain in respect of the settlement or translation
of the same borrowing, the gain to the extent of the loss previously recognized as an
adjustment should also be recognized as an adjustment to interest.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.106
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 3: Continuing with the aforesaid example 2:
If the exchange rate on 31st March, 20X3, is \$ $1=\mathbb{R}48$; the exchange rate on
31st March, 20X2, being \$ 1= 50, the borrowings are still not due for payment. The entity
will recognize a borrowing cost of  1,920 (\$ 1,000 x 4% x  48). There is an exchange
gain of 2,000 (\$ 1,000 x (₹50 - ₹48)). This will be adjusted in the borrowing cost as
there is unrealized exchange loss and the adjustment is less than the exchange loss of
2,800 recognized in earlier year.
If the exchange rate on 31st March, 20X3, is \$ $1=\mathbb{R}44$; the exchange rate on
31st March, 20X2, being \$ 1 = 50, the borrowings are still not due for payment. The entity
will recognize a borrowing cost of 1,760 (\$ 1,000 x 4% x  44). There is an exchange
gain of 6,000 [\$ 1,000 x (₹ 50 –  44)]. This will be adjusted in the borrowing cost upto
2,800 as there is unrealized exchange loss and the adjustment of the exchange loss
recognized in earlier years is of 2,800.
If the exchange rate on 31st March, 20X3, is \$1 = 44 and part of loan is repaid; the
exchange rate on 31st March, 20X2, being \$ $1=\boxed{\times}50;\$600$ of the borrowings was paid on
31st March, 20X2, \$ 400 of the borrowings are still not due for payment. The entity will
recognize a borrowing cost of₹704 (\$ 400 x 4% x 44). There is an exchange gain of
$\overline{x}2,400[\$400\times(\overline{x}50-\overline{x}44)]$. The unrealised exchange loss of earlier year is  4,000
[ $\$~400\times(\overline{x}50-\overline{x}40)]$ out of which
1,120 ( 2,800 x \$ 400 / \$ 1000) was charged in
31st March, 20X2, as borrowing cost. Thus, there will be an adjustment in the borrowing
cost upto 1,120 as this is unrealised exchange loss.
Illustration 6
ABC Ltd. has taken a loan of USD 20,000 on 1st April, 20X1 for constructing a plant at an interest
rate of 5% per annum payable on annual basis.
On 1st April, 20X1, the exchange rate between the currencies i.e. USD vs Rupees was 45 per
USD. The exchange rate on the reporting date i.e. 31st March, 20X2 is 48 per USD.
The corresponding amount could have been borrowed by ABC Ltd. from State Bank of India in
local currency at an interest rate of 11% per annum as on 1st April, 20X1.
Compute the borrowing cost to be capitalized for the construction of plant by ABC Ltd. for the
period ending 31st March, 20X2.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.107
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
Solution
In the above situation, the borrowing cost needs to determine for interest cost on such foreign
currency loan and eligible exchange loss difference if any.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Interest on foreign currency loan for the period:
$JSD~20,000\times5\%=USD~1,000$
Converted in : $USD~1,000\times\overline{\times}48/USD=\overline{\times}48,000$
Interest that would have resulted if the loan was taken in Indian Currency:
$SD~20,000\times\mp45/USD\times11\%=\mp99,000$
Difference between interest on foreign currency borrowing and local currency borrowing:
99,000-48,000 = 51,000
Increase in liability due to change in exchange difference: USD $20,000\times(48-45)=\overline{\pi}60,000$
Hence, out of exchange loss of 60,000 on principal amount of foreign currency loan, only exchange
loss to the extent of 51,000 is considered as borrowing costs.
Total borrowing cost to be capitalized is as under:
The exchange difference of 51,000 has been capitalized as borrowing cost and the remaining
 9,000 will be expensed off in the Statement of Profit and Loss as finance cost.
*****
3.5 RECOGNITION
Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of
a qualifying asset are capitalised as part of the cost of the qualifying asset.
Such borrowing cost are capitalised when below two conditions are satisfied:
it is probable that it will result in future economic benefits to the entity; and
the costs can be measured reliably.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.108
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Other borrowing costs are recognized as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
When an entity applies Ind AS 29 Financial Reporting in Hyperinflationary Economies, it
recognizes as an expense the part of borrowing costs that compensates for inflation during
the same period.
3.5.1 Borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation
The borrowing costs that are eligible for capitalisation are those borrowing costs that would have
been avoided if the expenditure on the qualifying asset had not been made.
Since it may not always be easy to identify a direct relationship between particular borrowings and
a qualifying asset and to determine the borrowings that could otherwise have been avoided, the
standard includes separate requirements for specific borrowings and general borrowings.
3.5.1.1 Specific borrowing costs
If an entity borrows funds specifically to obtain a qualifying asset, the borrowing costs that
are directly related to that qualifying asset can be readily identified.
The borrowings cost eligible for capitalisation would be the actual borrowing costs incurred
during the period less any investment income on the temporary investment of those
borrowings.
Note: A 'notional' borrowing cost cannot be capitalised. Ind AS 23 limits the amount
that can be capitalised to the actual borrowing costs incurred. The standard does not
address actual or imputed cost of equity. Where an entity has no borrowings and uses
its own cash resources to finance the construction of property, plant and equipment,
the entity cannot assume that interest that could have been earned on that cash
represents forgone benefit and could be capitalised.
An entity may obtain borrowed funds specifically and incur associated borrowing costs before
some or all of the funds are used for expenditures on the qualifying asset. In such
circumstances, the funds are often temporarily invested pending their expenditure on the
qualifying asset. In determining the amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation
during a period, any investment income earned on such funds is deducted from the borrowing
costs incurred.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
5.109
Borrowing costs
eligible for
capitalisation
Actual borrowing
costs incurred on
that borrowing
during the period
Investment income
on the temporary
investment of
those borrowings,
if any.
Illustration 7
Alpha Ltd. on 1st April, 20X1, borrowed
30,00,000 @ 9% to finance the construction of two
qualifying assets. Construction started on 1st April, 20X1. The loan facility was availed on 1st
April, 20X1 and was utilized as follows with remaining funds invested temporarily at 7%:
Calculate the cost of the asset and the borrowing cost to be capitalized.
Solution
*****
3.5.1.2 General borrowing costs
All borrowings that are not specific represents general borrowings.
When funds are borrowed specifically for a qualifying asset, costs in relation to that borrowing
are accounted for as specific borrowing costs until the asset is ready for its intended use or
sale; if the borrowing remains outstanding after the related asset is ready for its intended use
or sale, it becomes part of 'general borrowings'.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.110
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 8
On 1st April, 20X1, A Ltd. took 8% loan of ₹50,00,000 for construction of building A which is
repayable after 6 years ie on 31st March, 20X7. The construction of building was completed on
31st March, 20X3. A Ltd. started constructing a new building B in the year 20X3-20X4, for which
he used his existing borrowings. He has outstanding general-purpose loan of ₹25,00,000, interest
on which is payable @ 9% and ₹15,00,000, interest on which is payable @ 7%.
Recommend whether the specific borrowing should be transferred to the general borrowings pool
once the respective qualifying asset is completed.
Solution
Yes. If specific borrowings were not repaid once the relevant qualifying asset was completed, they
become general borrowings for as long as they are outstanding.
The borrowing costs that are directly attributable to obtaining qualifying assets are those borrowing
costs that would have been avoided if the expenditure on the qualifying asset had not been made.
If cash was not spent on other qualifying assets, it could be directed to repay this specific loan.
Thus, borrowing costs could be avoided (that is, they are directly attributable to other qualifying
assets).
*****
When general borrowings are used for qualifying assets, Ind AS 23 requires that, borrowing
costs eligible for capitalisation is calculated by applying a capitalisation rate to the
expenditures on qualifying assets.
The amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation is always limited to the amount of
actual borrowing costs incurred during the period.
3.5.2 Calculation of capitalisation rate
When the funds are borrowed generally for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying asset, the
entity shall determine the amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation by applying a
capitalisation rate to the expenditures on that qualifying asset.
The capitalisation rate is the weighted average of the borrowing costs applicable to all the
general borrowings of the entity that are outstanding during the period.
Borrowing costs in respect of specific funds borrowed for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying
asset shall be excluded from calculation of capitalisation rate until substantially all the
activities necessary to prepare that qualifying asset for its intended use or sale are complete.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.111
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
The amount of borrowing costs that an entity capitalises during a period shall not exceed the
amount of borrowing costs it incurred during that period.
Calculation of Borrowing Cost
Borrowing cost on funds
borrowed for specific use
Borrowing cost on funds borrowed for
general use but applied on qualifying asset
Expenditure incurred on
$QA^{**}x$ Interest rate on
such specific borrowings
Step 1: Calculate Capitalisation Rate
$(CR)^{*}$
Step 2: Calculation of Borrowing cost
to be capitalised
Expenditure incurred on QA x
Capitalisation rate
Total Borrowing Cost
$^{*}CR=$ Weighted average borrowing costs on outstanding borrowings of the entity (excluding specific borrowings cost)
Total outstanding borrowings of the entity during the period (excluding specific borrowings)
$**QA=$ Qualifying Asset
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.112
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 9
Beta Ltd. had the following loans in place at the end of 31st March, 20X2:
(Amounts in 000s)
14% Debentures were issued to fund the construction of office building on 1st July, 20X1 but
the development activities has yet to be started.
On 1st April, 20X1, Beta Ltd. began the construction of a Plant being a qualifying asset using
the existing borrowings. Expenditure drawn down for the construction was: 5,00,000 on
1st April, 20X1 and 25,00,000 on 1st January, 20X2.
Calculate the borrowing cost that can be capitalised for the plant.
Solution
Capitalisation rate for above illustration could also be calculated with the following approach by
assigning weights to the borrowings:
Answer in both the approaches would be same as can be seen from the above two solutions.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
5.113
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
3.5.3 Expenditure to which capitalisation rate is applied
In determining the borrowing costs to be capitalised, the amount of expenditure on a
qualifying asset include only those expenditures that have resulted in payments of cash,
transfers of other assets or the assumption of interest-bearing liabilities.
Expenditures are reduced by any progress payments received and grants received in
connection with the asset (see Ind AS 20 Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure
of Government Assistance).
The average carrying amount of the asset during a period, including borrowing costs
previously capitalised, is normally a reasonable approximation of the expenditures to which
the capitalisation rate is applied in that period.
3.5.4 Excess of the carrying amount over recoverable amount
When the carrying amount or the expected ultimate cost of the qualifying asset exceeds its
recoverable amount or net realisable value, the carrying amount is written down or written off in
accordance with the requirements of other Standards. In certain circumstances, the amount of the
write-down or write-off is written back in accordance with those other Standards.
3.6 PERIOD OF CAPITALISATION
3.6.1 Commencement of capitalisation
An entity is required to begin the capitalisation of borrowing costs as part of the cost of a
qualifying asset on the commencement date.
The commencement date is the date when the entity first meets all of the following conditions
cumulatively on a particular date:
(a)
it incurs expenditures for the asset;
(b)
it incurs borrowing costs; and
(c)
it undertakes activities that are necessary to prepare the asset for its intended use
or sale.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.114
FINANCIAL REPORTING
It incurs expenditures
for the asset
Commencement of
capitalisation
Starts from the date
when the entity first
meets all of the
following conditions:
Explanation to the three conditions for commencement date
Expenditures on a qualifying asset include:
It incurs borrowing
costs
It undertakes activities
that are necessary to
prepare the asset for its
intended use or sale.
Those expenditures that have resulted in payments of cash
transfers of other assets
assumption of interest-bearing liabilities
Expenditures are reduced by any progress payments received and grants received in
connection with the asset.
Activities necessary to prepare asset for its intended use or sale:
Includes technical and administrative work prior to the commencement of physical
construction, such as the activities associated with obtaining permits prior to the
commencement of the physical construction.
excludes the holding of an asset when no production or development that changes
the asset's condition is taking place.
For example, borrowing costs incurred while land is under development are capitalised during
the period in which activities related to the development are being undertaken. However,
borrowing costs incurred while land acquired for building purposes is held without any
associated development activity do not qualify for capitalisation.
Illustration 10: Commencement Date
X Ltd. is commencing a new construction project, which is to be financed by borrowing. The key
dates are as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
(i)
15th May, 20X1: Loan interest relating to the project started incurring
(ii)
2nd June, 20X1: Technical site planning commenced
(iii)
19th June, 20X1 : Expenditure on the project started incurring
(iv)
18th July, 20X1 : Construction work commenced
5.115
Identify the commencement date for capitalisation of borrowing cost.
Solution
In the above case, the three conditions to be tested for commencement date would be:
Borrowing cost has been incurred on : 15th May, 20X1
Expenditure has been incurred for the asset on: 19th June, 20X1
Activities necessary to prepare asset for its intended use or sale: 2nd June, 20X1
Commencement date would be the date when the above three conditions would be satisfied in all
i.e. 19th June, 20X1
*****
3.6.2 Suspension of capitalisation
Capitalisation of borrowing costs shall be suspended during the extended periods in which
the active development of a qualifying asset is suspended. Such costs are costs of holding
partially completed assets and do not qualify for capitalisation. However, the standard
distinguishes between extended periods of interruption (when capitalisation would be
suspended) and periods of temporary delay that are a necessary part of preparing the asset
for its intended purpose (when capitalisation is not normally suspended).
Capitalisation of borrowing cost is not suspended when temporary delay is a necessary part
of the process of getting an asset ready for its intended use or sale. For example,
capitalisation continues during the extended period when high water levels delay construction
of a bridge, if such high-water levels are common during the construction period in the
geographical region involved. Similarly, capitalisation continues during periods when
inventory is undergoing slow transformation - the example is given of inventories taking an
extended time to mature (presumably such products as Scotch whisky or Cognac, although
the relevance of this may be limited as these products are likely to meet the optional
exemption for 'routinely manufactured' products.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.116
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 4: Suspension of Capitalisation
(a)
(b)
Construction suspended between October, 20X1 to January, 20X2 during which
period certain heavy construction equipment under use was shifted to another site.
In this case, capitalization of borrowing costs needs to be suspended since active
development is interrupted.
When Qualifying Asset construction is about to complete, there was temporary delay
of 20 days on account of some technical reasons.
In this case, capitalization of borrowing costs shall be continued.
3.6.3 Cessation of capitalisation
Capitalisation of borrowing costs should cease when substantially all the activities necessary
to prepare the qualifying asset for its intended use or sale are complete.
An asset is normally ready for its intended use or sale when the physical construction of the
asset is complete even though routine administrative work might still continue. If minor
modifications, such as the decoration of a property to the purchaser's or user's specification,
are all that are outstanding, this indicates that substantially all the activities are complete.
When an entity completes the construction of a qualifying asset in parts and each part is
capable of being used while construction continues on other parts, the entity shall cease
capitalising borrowing costs when it completes substantially all the activities necessary to
prepare that part for its intended use or sale.
For e.g. A business park comprising several buildings, each of which can be used individually,
is a qualifying asset for which each part is capable of being usable while construction
continues on other parts.
For a qualifying asset that needs to be complete in its entirety before any part can be used
as intended, it would be appropriate to capitalise related borrowing costs until all the activities
necessary to prepare the entire asset for its intended use or sale are substantially complete.
An example of this is an industrial plant, such as a steel mill, involving several processes
which are carried out in sequence at different parts of the plant within the same site.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.117
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
Example 5
H Limited, a real estate company, gives immovable property on rent. It has completed on
31st May, 20X1, a commercial complex consisting of various offices that could be rented
out. It expects that the commercial complex will be completely rented out by 30th June,
20X1. However, due to adverse market conditions, only 10% of the commercial complex
could be rented out by its reporting date of 31st March, 20X2. H Limited wants to capitalise
the eligible borrowing costs incurred up to 31st March, 20X2.
H Limited should capitalise borrowing costs only up to 31st May, 20X1. The borrowing cost
incurred thereafter cannot be capitalised as the asset was ready for its intended use on
31st May, 20X1. The fact that only a small portion could be rented out by 31st March, 20X2,
is not relevant.
3.7
DISCLOSURE
Entities are required to disclose:
(a) the amount of borrowing costs capitalised during the period; and
(b)
the capitalisation rate used to determine the amount of borrowing costs eligible for
capitalisation
3.8 OTHER RELEVANT CONCEPTS
3.8.1 Dividends payable on shares classified as financial liabilities
An entity might finance its operations in whole or in part by the issue of preference shares
and in some circumstances these will be classified as financial liabilities (as per Ind AS
32). Dividends payable on these instruments would meet the definition of borrowing
costs, subject to the fulfillment of certain conditions.
Example 6
An entity might have funded the development of a qualifying asset by issuing redeemable
preference shares that are redeemable at the option of the holder and so are classified as
financial liabilities under Ind AS 32. In this case, dividend would be treated as interest and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.118
FINANCIAL REPORTING
meet the definition of borrowing costs and so should be capitalised following the principles
on specific borrowings as discussed in a separate section 4.5.1.1 above.
3.8.2 Capitalising borrowing cost in group financial statements
There may be a situation when the borrowings are taken by one company and qualifying
asset is developed by another company within a group.
It may be appropriate to capitalise interest in the group financial statements on
borrowings that appear in the financial statements of a different group entity from that carrying
out the development.
Based on the underlying principle of Ind AS 23, capitalisation in such circumstances would
only be appropriate if the amount capitalised fairly reflected the interest cost of the group on
borrowings from third parties that could have been avoided if the expenditure on the
qualifying asset were not made.
However, the entity carrying out the development should not capitalise any interest in
its own financial statements as it has no borrowings.
If, however, the entity has intra-group borrowings then interest on such borrowings may be
capitalised in its own financial statements.
Illustration 11
A subsidiary (or jointly controlled entity or associate) finances the construction of a
qualifying asset with an inter-company loan. Are borrowing costs incurred on the inter-
company loan capitalised in the separate financial statements of the subsidiary (or jointly
controlled entity or associate)?
Solution
Yes. Borrowing costs are capitalised to the extent of the actual costs incurred by the
subsidiary (or jointly controlled entity or associate).
*****
3.8.3 Cessation of capitalisation for maturing inventories
For maturing inventories, it is sometimes difficult to determine when the 'period of production'
ends, i.e. when inventories are being held for sale as opposed to being held to mature.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.119
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
Example 7
Whisky is 'mature' after three years but goes on improving with age for many more years.
Provided that it is consistent with the entity's business model to hold such items so that
they mature further, it would seem acceptable to continue to add borrowing costs to the
value of such maturing inventories for as long as it can be demonstrated that the particular
item of inventory continues to increase in value solely on account of increasing age, rather
than because of market fluctuations or inflation.
If this cannot be demonstrated, then the inventories should be regarded as held for sale and
no further borrowing costs should be capitalised.
3.9 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Larsen & Toubro Limited'
for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Borrowing Costs'.
Notes:
(1) Borrowing cost capitalised in accordance with Ind AS 23 "Borrowing Costs" is as follows:
(2) The average borrowing cost used for capitalisation is 7.29% (previous year: 6.56%).
Note in Property, Plant and Equipment & Capital work-in-progress
8.83 crore
Additions during the year and capital work-in-progress of buildings include
(previous year: 27.75 crore) being borrowing cost capitalised in accordance with
Accounting Standard (Ind AS) 23 "Borrowing Costs".
The rate used to determine the amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation is 6.23%
(previous year: 5.71%).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.120
FINANCIAL REPORTING
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Borrowing Costs
Borrowing costs include finance costs calculated using the effective interest method, finance
charges in respect of assets acquired on lease and exchange differences arising on foreign
currency borrowings, to the extent they are regarded as an adjustment to finance costs. In
cases where hedging instruments are acquired for protection against exchange rate risk
related to borrowings and are accounted as hedging a time-period related hedge item, the
borrowing costs also include the amortisation of premium element of the forward contract and
foreign currency basis spread as applicable, over the period of the hedging instrument.
Borrowing costs net of any investment income from the temporary investment of related
borrowings that are attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of a qualifying
asset are capitalised / inventoried as part of cost of such asset till such time the asset is ready
for its intended use or sale. A qualifying asset is an asset that necessarily requires a
substantial period of time to get ready for its intended use or sale. All other borrowing costs
are recognized in profit or loss in the period in which they are incurred..
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - 'Larsen & Toubro Limited')
3.10 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 23 VIS-À-VIS
AS 16
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
5.121
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.122
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.123
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
2.
Marine Transport Limited ordered 3 ships for its fleet on 1st April, 20X0. It pays a down
payment of 25% of the contract value of each of the ship out of long-term borrowings from a
scheduled bank. The delivery has to commence from the financial year 20X7. On
1st March, 20X2, the ship builder informs that it has commenced production of one ship. There
is no progress on other 2 ships. Marine Transport Limited prepares its financial statements
on financial year basis.
Advise whether it is permissible for Marine Transport Limited to capitalise any borrowing costs
for the financial year ended 31st March, 20X1 or 31st March, 20X2.
X Limited has a treasury department that arranges funds for all the requirements of the
Company including funds for working capital and expansion programs. During the year ended
31st March, 20X2, the Company commenced the construction of a qualifying asset and
incurred the following expenses:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.124
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The details of borrowings and interest thereon are as under:
3.
4.
Compute the borrowing costs that need to be capitalised.
An entity constructs a new head office building commencing on 1st September 20X1, which
continues till 31st December 20X1. Directly attributable expenditure at the beginning of the
month on this asset are 1,00,000 in September 20X1 and 2,50,000 in each of the months
of October to December 20X1.
The entity has not taken any specific borrowings to finance the construction of the asset but
has incurred finance costs on its general borrowings during the construction period. During
the year, the entity had issued 10% debentures with a face value of 20 lacs and had an
overdraft of 5,00,000, which increased to  7,50,000 in December 20X1. Interest was paid
on the overdraft at 15% until 1 October 20X1, then the rate was increased to 16%.
Calculate the capitalization rate for computation of borrowing cost in accordance with
Ind AS 23 'Borrowing Costs'.
K Ltd. began construction of a new building at an estimated cost of 7 lakh on
1st April, 20X1. To finance construction of the building it obtained a specific loan of 2 lakh
from a financial institution at an interest rate of 9% per annum.
The company's other outstanding loans were:
The expenditure incurred on the construction was:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
5.125
5.
The construction of building was completed by 31st January, 20X2.
Following the provisions of Ind AS 23 'Borrowing Costs', calculate the amount of interest to
be capitalized and pass necessary journal entry for capitalizing the cost and borrowing cost
in respect of the building as on 31st January, 20X2.
On 1st April, 20X1, entity A contracted for the construction of a building for 22,00,000. The
land under the building is regarded as a separate asset and is not part of the qualifying assets.
The building was completed at the end of March, 20X2, and during the period the following
payments were made to the contractor:
6.
Entity A's borrowings at its year end of 31st March, 20X2 were as follows:
a. 10%, 4-year note with simple interest payable annually, which relates specifically to
the project; debt outstanding on 31st March, 20X2 amounted to 7,00,000. Interest
of 65,000 was incurred on these borrowings during the year, and interest income of
 20,000 was earned on these funds while they were held in anticipation of payments.
b.
C.
12.5% 10-year note with simple interest payable annually; debt outstanding at
1st April, 20X1 amounted to 1,000,000 and remained unchanged during the year;
and
10% 10-year note with simple interest payable annually; debt outstanding at
1st April, 20X1 amounted to 1,500,000 and remained unchanged during the year.
Determine the amount of the borrowing costs which can be capitalized at the year end as per
relevant Ind AS.
In a group with Parent Company "P" there are 3 subsidiaries with following business:
"A" - Real Estate Company
"B" - Construction Company
"C" - Finance Company
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.126
FINANCIAL REPORTING
•
Parent Company has no operating activities of its own but performs management
functions for its subsidiaries.
• Financing activities and cash management in the group are coordinated centrally.
• Finance Company is a vehicle used by the group solely for raising finance.
•
All entities in the group prepare Ind AS financial statements.
The following information is relevant for the current reporting period 20X1-20X2:
Real Estate Company
•
Borrowings of 10,00,000 with an interest rate of 7% p.a.
•
•
Expenditures on qualifying assets during the period amounted to 15,40,000.
All construction works were performed by Construction Company. Amounts invoiced
to Real Estate Company included 10% profit margin.
Construction Company
• No borrowings during the period.
•
Financed 10,00,000 of expenditures on qualifying assets using its own cash
resources.
Finance Company
• Raised 20,00,000 at 7% p.a. externally and issued a loan to Parent Company for
general corporate purposes at the rate of 8%.
Parent Company
• Used loan from Finance Company to acquire a new subsidiary.
• No qualifying assets apart from those in Real Estate Company and Construction
Company.
• Parent Company did not issue any loans to other entities during the period.
Compute the amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation in the financial statements
of each of the four entities for the current reporting period 20X1-20X2.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Answers
5.127
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
1.
As per paragraph 5 of Ind AS 23, a qualifying asset is an asset that necessarily takes a
substantial period of time to get ready for its intended use or sale.
As per paragraph 17 of Ind AS 23, an entity shall begin capitalising borrowing costs as part
of the cost of a qualifying asset on the commencement date. The commencement date for
capitalisation is the date when the entity first meets all of the following conditions:
(a)
It incurs expenditures for the asset.
(b)
It incurs borrowing costs.
2.
(c)
It undertakes activities that are necessary to prepare the asset for its intended use or
sale.
The ship is a qualifying asset as it takes substantial period of time for its construction. Thus,
the related borrowing costs should be capitalised.
Marine Transport Limited borrows funds and incurs expenditures in the form of down payment
on 1st April, 20X0. Thus, condition (a) and (b) are met. However, condition (c) is met only on
1st March, 20X2, and that too only with respect to one ship. Thus, there is no capitalisation of
borrowing costs during the financial year ended 31st March, 20X1. Even during the financial
year ended 31st March, 20X2, borrowing costs relating to the 'one' ship whose construction
had commenced from 1st March, 20X2 will be capitalised from 1st March, 20X2 to 31st March,
20X2. All other borrowing costs are expensed.
The capitalisation rate is calculated as below:
Total borrowing costs / Weighted average total borrowings: 1,65,000/15,00,000 = 11%.
Interest to be capitalised is calculated as under:
On 2,50,000 @ 11% p.a. for $9~months=\overline{\times}20,625$
$On\mp3,00,000$ @ 11% p.a. for 4 months =  11,000
Total interest capitalised for the year ended 31st March 20X2 is 31,625
3. Since the entity has only general borrowing hence first step will be to compute the
capitalisation rate. The capitalisation rate of the general borrowings of the entity during the
period of construction is calculated as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.128
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Weighted average borrowings during period
$=\frac{(20,00,000\times4)+(500,000\times3)(750,000\times1)}{4}=\overline{7}25,62,500$
Capitalisation rate =
Total finance costs during the construction period
Weighted average borrowings during the constgruction period
$=96,250/25,62,500=3.756\%$
4.
(i)
Calculation of capitalization rate on borrowings other than specific borrowings
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.129
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
(ii) Computation of borrowing cost to be capitalized for specific borrowings and
general borrowings based on weighted average accumulated expenses
Note: Since construction of building started on 1st April, 20X1, it is presumed that all
the later expenditures on construction of building had been incurred at the beginning
of the respective month.
(iii) Total expenses to be capitalized for building
(iv)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Journal Entry
5.
5.130
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Alternatively, following journal entry may be passed if interest is paid on the
date of capitalization:
As per Ind AS 23, when an entity borrows funds specifically for the purpose of obtaining a
qualifying asset, the entity should determine the amount of borrowing costs eligible for
capitalisation as the actual borrowing costs incurred on that borrowing during the period less
any investment income on the temporary investment of those borrowings.
The amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalization, in cases where the funds are
borrowed generally, should be determined based on the capitalisation rate and expenditure
incurred in obtaining a qualifying asset. The costs incurred should first be allocated to the
specific borrowings.
Analysis of expenditure:
*Specific borrowings of  7,00,000 fully utilized on 1st April & on 30th June to the extent of
5,00,000 hence remaining expenditure of  1,00,000 allocated to general borrowings.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.
5.131
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 23
The capitalisation rate relating to general borrowings should be the weighted average of
the borrowing costs applicable to the entity's borrowings that are outstanding during the
period, other than borrowings made specifically for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying
asset.
Capitalisation rate = $=\frac{(10,00,000\times12.5\%)+(15,00,000\times10\%)}{10,00,000+15,00,000}=11\%$
Following is the treatment as per Ind AS 23:
Finance Company
No expenditure on qualifying assets have been incurred, so Finance Company cannot
capitalise anything.
Real Estate Company
70,000.
Total interest costs in the financial statements of Real Estate Company is
Expenditures on qualifying assets exceed total borrowings, so the total amount of interest
can be capitalised.
Construction Company
No interest expense has been incurred, so Construction Company cannot capitalise
anything.
Consolidated financial statements of Parent Company:
Total general borrowings of the group: ₹ $10,00,000+\overline{\pi}20,00,000=\overline{\pi}30,00,000$
Although Parent Company used proceeds from loan to acquire a subsidiary, this loan
cannot be excluded from the pool of general borrowings.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.132
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Total interest expenditures for the group $=\exists30,00,000\times7\%=\exists2,10,000$
Total expenditures on qualifying assets for the group are added up. Profit margin charged
by Construction Company to Real Estate Company is eliminated:
Real Estate Company - 15,40,000/1.1 $1=\overline{\times}14,00,000$
Construction Co - ₹10,00,000
Total consolidated expenditures on qualifying assets: $(14,00,000+10,00,000)=\overline{\pi}24,00,000$
Capitalisation rate $=7\%$
Borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation = 24,00,000 x 7% = 1,68,000
Total interest expenditures of the group are higher than borrowing costs eligible for
capitalisation calculated based on the actual expenditures incurred on the qualifying
assets. Therefore, only 1,68,000 can be capitalised.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
