CHAPTER
8
IND AS ON DISCLOSURES
IN THE FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS
UNIT 1:
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24: RELATED
PARTY DISCLOSURES
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
Understand the objective, scope and purpose of related party disclosures
in the financial statements
Define the terms related party, related party transactions, close members
of the family of a person, key management personnel, government related
entity and other related terms.
Ensure the necessary disclosures to be made by an entity in its financial
statements.
Analyse the effect of related party transactions in the financial position &
profit or loss due to existence of such related parties.
Understand the significant differences between Ind AS 24 and AS 18.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.2
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT OVERVIEW
Ind AS 24 "Related
Party Disclosure"
Indentification of
Related party
Related party
transactions
Not a related party
Name of related party
Irrespective of RP
transactions
Disclosures
Only when there is RP
transactions
Exemption from
disclosures to Govt.
related entitites.
1.1
INTRODUCTION
An entity in the course of its commerce and business enters into numerous transactions and gets
impacted by various related party relationships. It is a normal feature of commerce and business to
have related party relationships. Entities frequently carry on their business activities through
subsidiaries, joint ventures or associates. The entity has the ability to affect the financial and
operating policy of a subsidiary generally as it has control over it. In the case of joint venture, it has
joint control whereas in the case of an associate it has significant influence.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.3
It is quite probable that related party relationship may have an effect on the profit or loss and
financial position of an entity. The effect gets manifested through:
(a) Transactions that are
entered between related
parties may not be entered
with unrelated parties;
(b)
Transactions
unrelated
with
parties get
influenced because of related
party relationships.
• Example: An entity may sell goods to its parent at
cost. It may not sell goods at cost to an unrelated
party.
• Example: S Limited, a subsidiary of H Limited, in steel
manufacturing used to purchase billets from UR Limited.
H Limited acquires 100% stake in FS Limited who also
manufactures billets. FS Limited is now a fellow
subsidiary of S Limited. H Limited instructs S Limited
not to purchase billets from UR Limited but from FS
Limited.
Therefore, the users of the financial statements of any entity should have:
(a)
(b)
the knowledge of:
related party relationships of an entity;
entity's transactions, outstanding balances, commitments etc. with such related
parties;
as it may affect the user's assessments:
of operations of the entity and
the risks and opportunities faced by the entity.
1.2 OBJECTIVE
The objective of the Standard is to ensure that the financial statements of an entity contains
necessary disclosures with respect to:
(a) related party relationships;
(b) related party transactions;
(c) outstanding balances with related parties; and
(d) commitments with related parties.
The disclosures are necessary so that users' attention could be drawn to the possibility that financial
statements may be affected by such related party relationships and other items as mentioned above.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.4
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.3 SCOPE
The Standard has to be applied in:
(a) identifying
related party
relationships;
(b) identifying
related party
transactions;
(c) identifying
outstanding balances
between an entity and
its related parties;
(e) identifying the
circumstances in which
disclosures of above
items is to be made; and
The disclosures are to be made in:
(f) determining
the disclosures to
be made about the
above items.
(d) identifying
commitments between
an entity and its related
parties;
(a)
Individual financial statements of the entity.
(b)
Consolidated and separate financial statements of a parent, venturer or an investor prepared
in accordance with Ind AS 110 'Consolidated Financial Statements' or Ind AS 27, 'Separate
Financial Statements'.
Related party transactions and outstanding balances with other entities in a group are
disclosed in an entity's financial statements, however, intra-group related party transactions
and outstanding balances are eliminated in the preparation of consolidated financial
statements of the group.
Exception:
If the above intra group related party transactions & outstanding balances between investment
entity and its subsidiary are measured at fair value through profit or loss, then not eliminated.
Disclosures not required when either
Example 1
such disclosures are in conflict with the entity's duties of confidentiality in terms of a
statute, regulator or similar competent authority governing the entity; or
the entity is prohibited by the statute, regulator or similar competent authority to
disclose certain information otherwise required to be disclosed as per this Standard.
Banks are obliged by law to maintain confidentiality in respect of their customers' transactions
and this Standard would not override the obligation to preserve the confidentiality of customers'
dealings.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1.4 DEFINITIONS
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.5
The following definitions are relevant for understanding the Standard:
1.
A related party is (i) a person or (ii) an entity that is related to the reporting entity.
2.
A reporting entity in this Standard is an entity that is preparing its financial statements.
Thus two types of related party relationships are envisaged.
One relationship is between the reporting entity and a person or persons.
The other relationship is between the reporting entity and another entity or entities.
Note: The Standard clarifies that in considering each possible related party relationship, the
attention should be directed to the substance of the relationship and not merely the legal form.
1.4.1 Understanding relationship between the reporting entity and a
person(s)
3.
A person or a close member of that person's family is related to a reporting entity if that
person:
(a)
has control or joint control over the reporting entity;
(b)
has significant influence over the reporting entity; or
(c)
is a member of the key management personnel of
the reporting entity or
a parent of the reporting entity.
4.
Close members of the family of a person are the one who may be expected to influence
or be influenced by that person in their dealings with the entity. It includes:
(a)
that person's children, spouse or domestic partner, brother, sister, father and mother;
(b)
children of that person's spouse or domestic partner; and
(c) dependents of that person or that person's spouse or domestic partner.
5.
A parent is an entity that controls one or more entities and present consolidated financial
statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.6
Examples 2-5
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.
Mr. A holds 51% in equity share capital of A Limited. A Limited has no other form of
share capital. As Mr. A controls A Limited, he is a related party.
3.
Mrs. A is wife of Mr. A. Mr. A holds 51% of equity shares of A Limited. A Limited
has no other form of share capital. Mr. A controls A Limited. Since Mr. A is a related
party, Mrs. A is also a related party of A Limited.
4.
Mr. D is a director of A Limited. Being a member of key management personnel of
A Limited, he is related to A Limited.
5.
Mr. D is a director of H Limited. S Limited is a subsidiary of H Limited. Mr. D is
related to S Limited.
1.4.2 Understanding relationship between the reporting entity and
another entity/entities
6.
An entity is related to a reporting entity if any of the following conditions applies:
(a)
(b)
(c)
The entity and the reporting entity are members of the same group (which means that
each parent, subsidiary and fellow subsidiary is related to the others).
Example 6
SA Limited and SB Limited are subsidiaries of H Limited. SA Limited, SB Limited
and H Limited are related to each other.
One entity is an associate or joint venture of the other entity (or an associate or joint
venture of a member of a group of which the other entity is a member).
Example 7
AS Limited is an associate of S Limited. S Limited is a subsidiary of H Limited.
SH Limited is another subsidiary of H Limited. AS Limited and SH Limited are related
parties for S Ltd. and H Ltd.
Both entities are joint ventures of the same third party.
Example 8
H Limited has entered into 2 joint ventures, JHA Limited (joint venture with A Limited)
and JHB Limited (joint venture with B Limited). JHA Limited and JHB Limited are
related parties.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.7
One entity is a joint venture of a third entity and the other entity is an associate of the
third entity.
Example 9
JH Limited is a joint venture of H Limited. AH limited is an associate of H Limited.
JH Limited and AH Limited are related parties.
The entity is a post-employment benefit plan for the benefit of employees of either the
reporting entity or an entity related to the reporting entity. If the reporting entity is itself
such a plan, the sponsoring employers are also related to the reporting entity.
The entity is controlled or jointly controlled by a person identified in 3 above.
Example 10
Mr. A controls A Limited (the reporting entity). He also controls B Limited. A Limited
and B Limited are related to each other.
A person identified in 3(a) above has significant influence over the entity or is a
member of the key management personnel of the entity (or of a parent of the entity).
Example 11
Mr. A controls A Limited (the reporting entity). He is a non-executive director in
B Limited. A Limited and B Limited are related parties.
The entity, or any member of a group of which it is a part, provides key management
personnel services to the reporting entity or to the parent of the reporting entity.
Example 12
A Ltd is a parent company with 3 subsidiary companies- B Ltd. C Ltd & D Ltd. It also
has an associate company E Ltd. Subsidiary F Ltd of E Ltd provides key
management personnel services to A Ltd. F Ltd. is in a related party relationship
with A, B, C D & E Ltd.
The aforesaid definition is wide and exhaustive. It is quite possible that the
identification of related parties may become an onerous task. The standard, therefore,
as has been stated above, lays emphasis on the substance of the relationship rather
than legal form.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.8
FINANCIAL REPORTING
7.
8.
9.
10.
Control exists when the investor is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its
involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power
over investee.
Joint Control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement which exists
only when decisions about the relevant activities require the unanimous consent of the parties
sharing control.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy
decisions of the investee, but is not control of those policies.
The terms 'control', 'joint control' and 'significant influence' are discussed in detail in chapters
on Ind AS 110, Consolidated Financial Statements, Ind AS 111 Joint Arrangements' & Ind AS
28, Investments in Associates & Joint Ventures.
Key management personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility for
planning, directing and controlling the activities of the entity, directly or indirectly, including
any director (whether executive or otherwise) of that entity.
Analysis:
The definition includes executive as well as non-executive directors who have responsibility
for the management and direction of a significant part of the business. It is not necessary that
these people should have the 'director' designation. The term also includes members of the
management committee(s), if those committee(s) have the authority for planning, directing
and controlling the entity's activities.
The Standard further states that in the definition of a related party, an associate includes
subsidiaries of the associate and a joint venture includes subsidiaries of the joint venture.
Example 13
R Limited has an associate B Limited. B Limited has a subsidiary S Limited, a joint venture
J Limited and an associate A Limited. R Limited is the reporting entity. It identifies
B Limited and S Limited as its related parties. J Limited and A Limited are not related
parties of R Limited.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.9
Person(s)
Relationship of an entity with
member
who is
a
of
who has
the key
management
personnel of
control or who has
joint control significant
over
the influence
reporting over the
entity;
reporting
the
entity
reporting
entity or
a parent of
the
reporting
entity
Another Entity(ies)
It they are members of the same group i.e parent &
subsidiaries and fellow subsidiaries
One entity is an associate or joint venture of the other entity
or of a member of a group of which the other entity is a
member.
Both entities are joint ventures of the same third party.
One entity is a joint venture of a third entity and the other entity
is an associate of the third entity.
The entity is a post-employment benefit plan for the benefit of
employees of either the reporting entity or an entity related to the
reporting entity.
If the reporting entity is itself such a plan, the sponsoring
employers are also related to the reporting entity.
The entity is controlled or jointly controlled by a person as defined
in 3 above of the reporting entity
A person as defined under 3(a) above has significant influence
over the entity or is a member of the key management
personnel of the entity (or of a parent of the entity).
The entity, or any member of a group of which it is a part,
provides key management personnel services to the reporting
entity or to the parent of the reporting entity.
1.4.3 Understanding who are not related parties
The Standard clarifies that certain relationships are not related party relationships. These are as
follows:
(a) Two entities are not related parties simply because they have a director or other member of
key management personnel in common or because a member of key management personnel
of one entity has significant influence over the other entity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.10
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Examples 14 & 15
14. Mr. A is a director in X Limited. He is also a director in Y Limited. He has no other
interest in either of these companies. There are no transactions between these two
entities. X Limited and Y Limited are not related parties.
15.
Mr. A is a director in X Limited. He is also a director in Y Limited. He has no other
interest in either of these companies. Y Limited purchases the entire production of
X Limited. The transactions are always at arm's length. X Limited and Y Limited
may be related parties as it is quite possible that Y Limited may be able to exercise
control/significant control over X Limited. As per this Standard substance is more
important than mere legal form. Further information and analysis are required here
to conclude; by virtue of the transaction only, it cannot be said that they are related
parties.
(b) Two venturers are not related parties simply because they share joint control over a joint
venture.
Example 16
JV Limited is an equal joint venture of J Limited and V Limited. J Limited and V Limited are
not related parties.
(c) (i) providers of finance, (ii) trade unions, (iii) public utilities, and (iv) departments and agencies
of a government that does not control, jointly control or significantly influence the reporting
entity, are not related parties simply by virtue of their normal dealings with an entity (even
though they may affect the freedom of action of an entity or participate in its decision-making
process).
(d)
Example 17
A Bank and B Bank has provided finance to XY Limited. By virtue of loan agreement, they
occupy a non-executive observer seat on the Board of Directors of XY Limited. A Bank
and B Bank are not related parties of XY Limited.
a customer, supplier, franchisor, distributor or general agent with whom an entity transacts a
significant volume of business, simply by virtue of the resulting economic dependence.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.11
Example 18
A Limited is an auto ancillary of an automobile company. It supplies all its production to
the automobile company. Automobile company has no other interest in A Limited.
A Limited and automobile company are not related parties.
Not a related
partiese
(a) Two
entities
are not related
parties
because
simply
they
have a director
or other member
of
key
management
personnel
in
common
or
because a
member of key
management
personnel of
one entity has
significant
influence
over
the other entity.
(b)Two
venturers are
not related
parties simply
because they
share
joint
control over a
joint venture.
(iv)
(c)(i) providers of
finance, (ii) trade
unions, (iii)
public
utilities, and
departments and
agencies of a
government that does
not control, jointly
control or significantly
influence the reporting
entity, are not related
parties simply by
virtue of their normal
dealings with an entity
(even though they
may affect the
freedom of action of
an entity or participate
in its decision-making
process).
(d)a customer,
supplier,
franchisor,
distributor
of
or
general agent
with whom an
entity transacts
a significant
volume
business, simply
by virtue of the
resulting
economic
dependence.
1.4.4 Understanding related party transactions
11. A related party transaction is a transfer of resources, services or obligations between a
reporting entity and a related party, regardless of whether a price is charged.
Examples
(a)
purchases or sales of goods (finished or unfinished);
(b)
purchases or sales of property and other assets;
(c)
rendering or receiving of services;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.12
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(d)
leases;
(e)
transfers of research and development;
(f)
transfers under licence agreements;
(g)
transfers under finance arrangements (including loans and equity contributions in cash
or in kind);
(h)
provision of guarantees or collateral;
(i)
commitments to do something if a particular event occurs or does not occur in the
future, including executory contracts1 (recognised and unrecognised);
(j)
settlement of liabilities on behalf of the entity or by the entity on behalf of that related
party; and
(k)
management contracts including for deputation of employees.
Note: It is not necessary for any consideration to be passed for the related party transactions.
Also, participation by a parent or subsidiary in a defined benefit plan that shares risks between group
entities is a transaction between related parties.
1.4.5 Other Important Definitions
12.
Compensation includes all employee benefits (as defined in Ind AS 19, Employee
Benefits) including employee benefits to which Ind AS 102, Share-based Payments, applies.
Employee benefits are all forms of consideration paid, payable or provided by the entity, or
on behalf of the entity, in exchange for services rendered to the entity. It also includes such
consideration paid on behalf of a parent of the entity in respect of the entity. Compensation
includes:
(a) short-term employee benefits, monetary such as wages, salaries and social security
contributions, paid annual leave and paid sick leave, profit-sharing and bonuses (if
payable within twelve months of the end of the period) and non-monetary benefits
(such as medical care, housing, cars and free or subsidised goods or services) for
current employees;
(b)
(c)
post-employment benefits such as pensions, other retirement benefits, post-
employment life insurance and post-employment medical care;
other long-term employee benefits, including long service leave or sabbatical leave,
jubilee or other long service benefits, long-term disability benefits and, if they are not
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.13
payable wholly within twelve months after the end of the period, profit-sharing,
bonuses and deferred compensation;
(d)
termination benefits; and
(e)
share-based payment.
13.
14.
Government refers to government, government agencies and similar bodies whether local,
national or international.
A government-related entity is an entity that is controlled, jointly controlled or significantly
influenced by a government.
1.5 DISCLOSURES
The disclosure requirements can be broadly classified into two categories.
(a)
(b)
Category 1 requires disclosures of relationships even though there are no related party
transactions between the disclosed related parties.
Category 2 requires disclosures of relationships and transactions only when there are related
party transactions.
1.5.1 Disclosure- Relationships between parent and subsidiaries
The following disclosures of relationships, if exist, must be made irrespective of the fact whether
there have been related party transactions by the entity:
Under this an entity is required to disclose the name of its parent and, if different, the ultimate
controlling party. It may be noted that the ultimate controlling party may be a person.
Example 19
S4 Limited (reporting entity) is a subsidiary of S3 Limited. S3 Limited is a subsidiary of
S2 Limited. S2 Limited is a subsidiary of S1 Limited. S1 Limited is a subsidiary of
H Limited. S4 Limited, S3 Limited, S2 Limited and S1 Limited must disclose the name and
relationship with S3 Limited, S2 Limited and S1 Limited respectively and with H Limited.
If neither the entity's parent nor the ultimate controlling party produces consolidated financial
statements available for public use, the name of the next most senior parent that does so
shall also be disclosed.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.14
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Examples 20 & 21
20. S4 Limited (reporting entity) is a subsidiary of S3 Limited. S3 Limited is a subsidiary
of S2 Limited. S2 Limited is a subsidiary of S1 Limited. S1 Limited is a subsidiary
of H Limited. Only S2 Limited and S1 Limited produces consolidated financial
statements for public use. S4 Limited must disclose the name and relationship with
S3 Limited, S2 Limited, S1 Limited and H Limited.
21. S4 Limited (reporting entity) is a subsidiary of S3 Limited. S3 Limited is a subsidiary
of S2 Limited. S2 Limited is a subsidiary of S1 Limited. S1 Limited is a subsidiary
of H Limited. S3 Limited, S2 Limited, S1 Limited and H Limited all produces
consolidated financial statements for public use. S4 Limited must disclose the name
and relationship with S3 Limited and H Limited.
The disclosure of relationship between a parent and its subsidiary (reporting entity) is
important because the existence of control relationship may prevent the reporting entity from
being independent in making its financial and operating decisions. The disclosure of the
name of the related party and the nature of the related party relationship where control exists
may sometimes be at least as relevant in appraising an entity's prospects as are the operating
results and the financial position presented in its financial statements. Such a related party
may establish the entity's credit standing, determine the source and price of its raw materials,
and determine to whom and at what price the product is sold.
The Standard clarifies that the requirement to disclose related party relationships between a
parent and its subsidiaries is in addition to the disclosure requirements in Ind AS 110,
Consolidated Financial Statements, Ind AS 28, Investments in Associates, and Joint
Ventures.
1.5.2 Category 2 Disclosure
Under this category, two types of disclosures are required. The first requires disclosures related to
compensation to key management personnel. The second requires other disclosures where there
have been related party transactions during the year.
1.5.2.1 Disclosures of compensation to key management personnel
An entity is required to disclose
(i)
total compensation to key management personnel and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.15
(ii) Compensation for each of the following categories:
(a)
short-term employee benefits;
(b)
post-employment benefits;
(c)
other long-term benefits;
(d)
termination benefits;
(e)
share-based payments.
If an entity obtains key management personnel services from another entity (the 'management
entity'), the entity is not required to apply the requirements to the compensation paid or payable by
the management entity to the management entity's employees or directors.
1.5.2.2 Disclosures where there have been related party transactions during the year
Where an entity has had related party transactions during the periods covered by the financial
statements, it shall disclose, in addition to disclosures listed above, the following for the users
to understand the potential effect of these relationships and transactions on the financial
statements:
(a)
the nature of the related party relationship;
(b)
the information about these related party transactions and outstanding balances,
including commitments.
The disclosures, at a minimum, shall include:
(a)
the amount of the transactions;
(b)
the amount of outstanding balances, including commitments, and:
(c)
(d)
*
their terms and conditions, including whether they are secured, and the nature
of the consideration to be provided in settlement; and
details of any guarantees given or received;
provisions for doubtful debts related to the amount of outstanding balances; and
the expense recognized during the period in respect of bad or doubtful debts due from
related parties.
Amounts incurred by the entity for the provision of key management personnel services that
are provided by a separate management entity shall be disclosed.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.16
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The aforesaid disclosures shall be made separately for each of the following categories:
(a)
the parent;
(b)
entities with joint control or significant influence over the entity;
(c)
subsidiaries;
(d)
associates;
(e)
joint ventures in which the entity is a joint venturer;
(f)
key management personnel of the entity or its parent; and
(g)
other related parties.
The classification of amounts payable to, and receivable from, related parties in the different
categories is an extension of the disclosure requirements in Ind AS 1, Presentation of
Financial Statements, for information to be presented either in the balance sheet or in the
notes. The categories are extended to provide a more comprehensive analysis of related
party balances and apply to related party transactions.
However, disclosures that related party transactions were made on terms equivalent to those
that prevail in arm's length transactions should be made only if such terms can be
substantiated.
Items of a similar nature may be disclosed in aggregate except when separate disclosure is
necessary for an understanding of the effects of related party transactions on the financial
statements of the entity.
Disclosure of details of particular transactions with individual related parties would frequently
be too voluminous to be easily understood. Accordingly, items of a similar nature may be
disclosed in aggregate by type of related party. However, this is not done in such a way as
to obscure the importance of significant transactions.
Example 22
Purchases or sales of goods are not aggregated with purchases or sales of fixed assets. Nor a
material related party transaction with an individual party is clubbed in an aggregated disclosure.
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'ITC Limited' for the financial
year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Related Party disclosure as per Ind AS 24'.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.17
29. Related Party Disclosures
1. ENTERPRISES WHERE CONTROL EXISTS:
Subsidiaries:
a)
Srinivasa Resorts Limited
b)
Fortune Park Hotels Limited
c)
Bay Islands Hotels Limited
d)
WelcomHotels Lanka (Private) Limited, Sri Lanka
e)
Landbase India Limited
f)
Russell Credit Limited and its subsidiary
Greenacre Holdings Limited
g)
2.
i)
Technico Pty Limited, Australia and its subsidiaries
Technico Technologies Inc., Canada
Technico Asia Holdings Pty Limited, Australia and its subsidiary
Technico Horticultural (Kunming) Co. Limited, China
Technico Agri Sciences Limited
Wimco Limited
Pavan Poplar Limited
h)
i)
j)
k)
Prag Agro Farm Limited
1)
ITC Infotech Limited, UK
ITC Infotech India Limited and its subsidiaries
ITC Infotech (USA), Inc. and its subsidiary
Indivate Inc., USA
m) Gold Flake Corporation Limited
OTHER RELATED PARTIES WITH WHOM THE COMPANY HAD TRANSACTIONS
Associates & Joint Ventures:
Associates
a) Gujarat Hotels Limited
b) International Travel House Limited
c) Delectable Technologies Private Limited
being associates of the Company, and
d) Tobacco Manufacturers (India) Limited (of which the Company is an associate)
and the subsidiaries of its ultimate parent company (British American Tobacco p.l.c.)
Associates of the Company's subsidiaries
a) ATC Limited
being associate of Gold Flake Corporation Limited
b) Divya Management Limited, and
c) Antrang Finance Limited
being associates of Russell Credit Limited
Joint Ventures
Maharaja Heritage Resorts Limited
Joint Venture of the Company's subsidiary
ITC Essentra Limited
being joint venture of Gold Flake Corporation Limited
ii) a)
@Non-Executive Director up to 22.08.2021. Appointed as Independent Director w.e.f. 20.12.2021.
# Independent Directors
Chief Financial Officer
S. Dutta
Company Secretary
R. K. Singhi
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.18
FINANCIAL REPORTING
b) Relatives of Key Management Personnel:
T. Anand (wife of N. Anand)
R. Tandon (wife of R. Tandon)
N. Singhi (wife of R. K. Singhi)
iii) Employee Trusts:
IATC Provident Fund
a)
b)
ITC Defined Contribution Pension Fund
c) ITC Management Staff Gratuity Fund
d)
ITC Employees Gratuity Fund
e)
ITC Gratuity Fund 'C'
f)
ITC Pension Fund
g)
ILTD Seasonal Employees Pension Fund
h)
ITC Platinum Jubilee Pension Fund
i)
ITC Bhadrachalam Paperboards Limited Management Staff Pension Fund
j)
ITC Bhadrachalam Paperboards Limited Gratuity Fund 'A'
k)
1)
ITC Hotels Limited Employees Superannuation Scheme
ITC Bhadrachalam Paperboards Limited Gratuity Fund 'C'
m) Sunrise Spices Limited Employees Gratuity Fund
29. Related Party Disclosures (Contd.)
3. DISCLOSURE OF TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN THE COMPANY AND RELATED PARTIES AND THE STATUS OF OUTSTANDING BALANCES AS AT 31.03.2022
(in Crores)
Includes rent pertaining to leases classified as Right of Use Assets.
The amounts outstanding are unsecured and will be settled in cash.
1 Post employment benefits are actuarially determined on overall basis and hence not separately provided.
2 During the year, the Company granted Stock Options to eligible employees, including Executive Directors and KMPs, under its Employee Stock Option Schemes at 'market price' [within the meaning of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Share Based Employee Benefits and
Sweat Equity) Regulations, 2021]. The Company has also granted Employee Stock Appreciation Linked Reward Units (ESAR Units) to the aforesaid persons in the previous years under the 'ITC Employee Cash Settled Stock Appreciation Linked Reward Plan'. Since such Stock Options and
ESAR Units are not tradeable, no perquisite or benefit is immediately conferred upon the employee by grant of such Stock Options/ESAR Units, and accordingly the said grants have not been considered as remuneration. However, in accordance with Ind AS-102, the Company has recorded
employee benefits expense by way of share based payments to employees at 61.20 Crores for the year ended 31st March, 2022 (2021-56.69 Crores), of which 23.14 Crores (2021-27.71 Crores) is attributable to Executive Directors and KMPs.
(Source: Annual Report for 2021-2022 of 'ITC Limited')
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.19
1.6 EXEMPTION TO GOVERNMENT-RELATED ENTITIES
A reporting entity is exempt from the disclosure requirements in relation to (i) related party
transactions (ii) outstanding balances and (iii) commitments with:
(a)
(b)
a government that has control, joint control or significant influence over the reporting
entity; and
another entity that is a related party because the same government has control, joint
- control or significant influence over both the reporting entity and the other entity.
However, in case the reporting entity opts to apply the exemption, it shall disclose:
the name of the government;
(a)
(b)
(c)
the nature of the government's relationship with the entity (whether the government
has control, joint control or significant influence over the entity);
to enable the users of the entity's financial statements to understand the effect of
related party transactions on its financial statements, the following information in
sufficient details:
*
the nature and amount of each individually significant transaction;
for other transactions that are not significant individually but are significant
when aggregated, either a qualitative or quantitative indication of their extent.
Thus, the reporting entity is expected to apply its judgment to determine the level of details it
is required to disclose as per above. To enable the reporting entity to arrive at decision, it
shall consider:
(a)
the closeness of the related party relationship;
(b)
whether the transaction is significant in size;
(c)
whether the transaction is carried out on non-market terms;
(d)
whether these are outside the normal day to day business operations, such as
purchase and sales of businesses
(e)
whether they are disclosed to regulatory or supervisory authorities;
(f)
whether they are reported to senior management;
(g)
whether they are subject to shareholder approval.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.20
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Cochin Shipyard Limited'
for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Related Party disclosure as per Ind AS 24'.
(Source: Annual Report for 2021-2022 of 'Cochin Shipyard Limited')
Disclosure requirements when exemption applies
In Entity A's financial statements, an example of disclosure to comply for individually significant
transactions could be:
Example of disclosure for individually significant transaction carried out on non-market terms
Example 23
On 15 January, 20X1 Entity A, a utility company in which Government G indirectly owns
75 per cent of outstanding shares, sold a 10-hectare piece of land to another government-
related utility company for 5 million. On 31, December 20X0 a plot of land in a similar
location, of a similar size and with similar characteristics, was sold for 3 million. There
had not been any appreciation or depreciation of the land in the intervening period. See
note X [of the financial statements] for disclosure of government assistance as required
by Ind AS 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government
Assistance, and notes Y and Z [of the financial statements] for compliance with other
relevant Indian Accounting Standards.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.21
Example of disclosure for individually significant transaction because of size of transaction
Example 24
In the year ended December 20X1 Government G provided Entity A, a utility company in
which Government G indirectly owns 75 per cent of outstanding shares, with a loan
equivalent to 50 percent of its funding requirement, repayable in quarterly instalments over
the next five years. Interest is charged on the loan at a rate of 3 per cent, which is
comparable to that charged on Entity A's bank loans.* See notes Y and Z [of the financial
statements] for compliance with other relevant Indian Accounting Standards.
Example of disclosure of collectively significant transactions in Entity A's financial
statements, an example of disclosure to comply with for collectively significant transactions
could be:
Example 25
Government G, indirectly, owns 75 per cent of Entity A's outstanding shares. Entity A's
significant transactions with Government G and other entities controlled, jointly controlled
or significantly influenced by Government G are [a large portion of its sales of goods and
purchases of raw materials] or [about 50 per cent of its sales of goods and about
35 per cent of its purchases of raw materials]. The company also benefits from guarantees
by Government G of the company's bank borrowing. See note X [of the financial
statements] for disclosure of government assistance as required by Ind AS 20, Accounting
for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance, and notes Y and Z [of
the financial statements] for compliance with other relevant Indian Accounting Standards.
1.7
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 24 VIS-A-VIS
AS 18
*If the reporting entity had concluded that this transaction constituted government assistance it would have
needed to consider the disclosure in Ind AS 20.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.22
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.23
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.24
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Note: It is strongly advised to draw the diagrams of related party relationships for the following
illustrations to test the understanding of the subject matter.
Illustration 1: Associates and subsidiaries
Entity P Limited has a controlling interest in subsidiaries SA Limited and SB Limited and
SC Limited. SC Limited is a subsidiary of SB Limited. P Limited also has significant influence
over associates A1 Limited and A2 Limited. Subsidiary SC Limited has significant influence over
associate A3 Limited
Examine related party relationships of various entities.
Solution
Subsidiary
P
Associates
SA
SB
A1
A2
_Associate
SC
A3
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.25
In Separate Financial Statements of P Limited: SA Limited, SB Limited, SC Limited,
A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited are all related parties.
In the Individual Financial Statements of SA Limited: P Limited, SB Limited, SC Limited,
A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited are all related parties.
In the Individual Financial Statements of SB Limited: P Limited, SA Limited, SC Limited,
A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited are all related parties.
In the Individual Financial Statements of SC Limited: P Limited, SA Limited, SB Limited,
A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited are all related parties.
In the Individual Financial Statements of associates A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited;
P Limited, SA Limited, SB Limited and SC Limited are related parties.
A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited are not related to each other.
For Parent's consolidated financial statements: A1 Limited, A2 Limited and A3 Limited are
related to the Group
*****
Illustration 2: Key management personnel
Mr. X has a 100% investment in A Limited. He is also a member of the key management personnel
(KMP) of C Limited. B Limited has a 100% investment in C Limited.
Required
(a)
Examine related party relationships from the perspective of C Ltd. for A Ltd.
(b)
Examine related party relationships from the perspective of C Ltd. for A Ltd. if Mr. X is a
KMP of B Ltd. and not C Ltd.
(c)
Will the outcome in (a) & (b) would be different if Mr. X has joint control over A Ltd.
(d)
Will the outcome in (a) & (b) would be different if Mr. X has significant influence over
A Ltd.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.26
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
(a)
A Ltd. is related to C Ltd. because Mr. X controls A Ltd. and is a member of KMP of C Ltd.
Mr. X
B Ltd
100%
Investment
Key Management
personnel
A Ltd
100%
investment
C Ltd
(b)
Still A Ltd. will be related to C Ltd.
Mr. X
100% Investment
Key
Management
A Ltd
(c) No, Still A Ltd. will be related to C Ltd.
Joint control
A Ltd
Mr. X
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
B Ltd
100% Investment
C Ltd
Key Management
personnel
B Ltd
100%
Investment
C Ltd
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.27
(d) Yes, A Ltd. is not controlled by Mr. X. Therefore, despite Mr. X being KMP of C Ltd.,
A Ltd., having significant influence of Mr. X, will not be considered as related party of
C Ltd.
Mr. X
Significant
Influence
Key Management
personnel
B Ltd.
A Ltd.
*****
Illustration 3: Person as investor
Mr. X has an investment in A Limited and B Limited.
100%
Investment
C Ltd.
Required
(i)
Examine when can related party relationship be established
(a)
from the perspective of A Limited's financial statements:
(b)
from the perspective of B Limited's financial statements:
(ii)
Will A Limited and B Limited be related parties if Mr. X has only significant influence over
both A Limited and B Limited
Solution
(i) (a)
(b)
If Mr. X controls or jointly controls A Limited, B Limited is related to A Limited when
Mr. X has control, joint control or significant influence over Entity B.
If Mr. X controls or jointly controls A Limited, A Limited is related to Entity B when
Mr. X has control, joint control or significant influence over Entity B.
(ii) No, A Ltd. & B Ltd., will not be considered as related party since no direct or indirect control
is exercised on each other in any of the manner.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.28
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 4: Partial exemption for government related entities
Government G directly controls Entity 1 and Entity 2. It indirectly controls Entity A and Entity B
through Entity 1, and Entity C and Entity D through Entity 2. Person X is a member of the key
management personnel in Entity 1.
Examine the entity to whom the exemption for disclosure to be given and for transaction with
whom.
Solution
For Entity A's financial statements, the exemption of Ind AS 24 applies to:
(a)
(b)
transactions with Government G; and
transactions with Entities 1 and 2 and Entities B, C and D. However, that exemption does
not apply to transactions with Person X.
Govt. G
Direct Control
Key Management
personnel
Mr. X
Entity 1
Entity 2
Entity A
Entity B
Entity C
Entity D
Illustration 5
*****
Power Limited is a producer of electricity. Transmission Limited regularly purchases electricity
from Power Limited. Power Limited whose financial year ends on March 31, 20X2, acquired 100%
shareholding of Transmission Limited on July 15, 20X1. However, the entire shareholding is
disposed of on March 21, 20X2. Power Limited and Transmission Limited had transactions when
Transmission Limited was a subsidiary of Power Limited and also in the period when it was not a
subsidiary of Power Limited.
For which period, related party disclosure should Power Limited make in its financial statements
for the year ended March 31, 20X2 with respect to transactions with Transmission Limited.
Solution
Power Limited should in its financial statements for the year ended March 31, 20X2 make related
party disclosures for the period from July 15, 20X1 to March 21, 20X2 when Transmission Limited
was its subsidiary.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.29
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
Questions
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1.
Mr. X is a domestic partner of Ms. Y. Mr. X has an investment in A Limited and Ms. Y has
an investment in B Limited.
Required
(a)
Examine when can a related party relationship is established, from the perspective of
A Limited's financial statements:
(b)
Examine when can related party relationship is established, from the perspective of
B Limited's financial statements:
(c)
Will A Limited and B Limited be related parties if Mr. X has only significant influence
over A Limited and Ms. Y also has significant influence over B Limited:
2.
A Limited has both (i) joint control over B Limited and (ii) joint control or significant influence
over C Limited
Required
(a)
Examine related party relationship from the perspective of C Limited's financial
statements.
(b)
Examine related party relationship from the perspective of B Limited's financial
statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.30
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.
4.
5.
ABC Ltd. is a long-standing customer of XYZ Ltd. Mrs. P whose husband is a director in
XYZ Ltd. purchased a controlling interest in entity ABC Ltd. on 1st June, 20X1. Sales of
products from XYZ Ltd. to ABC Ltd. in the two-month period from 1st April 20X1 to
31st May 20X1 totalled  8,00,000. Following the share purchase by Mrs. P, XYZ Ltd. began
to supply the products at a discount of 20% to their normal selling price and allowed
ABC Ltd. three months' credit (previously ABC Ltd. was only allowed one month's credit,
XYZ Ltd.'s normal credit policy). Sales of products from XYZ Ltd. to ABC Ltd. in the ten-
month period from 1st June 20X1 to 31st March 20X2 totalled  60,00,000. On
31st March 20X2, the trade receivables of XYZ Ltd. included 18,00,000 in respect of
amounts owing by ABC Ltd.
Analyse and show (where possible by quantifying amounts) how the above event would be
reported in the financial statements of XYZ Ltd. for the year ended 31st March 20X2 as per
Ind AS. You are required to mention the disclosure requirements as well.
Mr. Atul is an independent director of a company X Ltd. He plays a vital role in the
Management of X Ltd. and contributes in major decision making process of the organisation.
X Ltd. pays sitting fee of 2,00,000 to him for every Board of Directors' (BOD) meeting he
attends. Throughout the year, X Ltd. had 5 such meetings which was attended by Mr. Atul.
Similarly, a non-executive director, Mr. Naveen also attended 5 BOD meetings and charged
1,50,000 per meeting. The Accountant of X Ltd. believes that they being not the
employees of the organisation, their fee should not be disclosed as per related party
transaction in accordance with Ind AS 24.
Examine whether the sitting fee paid to independent director and non-executive director is
required to be disclosed in the financial statements prepared as per Ind AS?
Mr. X, is the financial controller of ABC Ltd., a listed entity which prepares consolidated
financial statements in accordance with Ind AS. Mr. X has recently produced the final draft
of the financial statements of ABC Ltd. for the year ended 31st March, 20X2 to the managing
director Mr. Y for approval. Mr. Y, who is not an accountant, had raised following query
from Mr. X after going through the draft financial statements:
One of the notes to the financial statements gives details of purchases made by
ABC Ltd. from PQR Ltd. during the period 20X1-20X2. Mr. Y owns 100% of the shares in
PQR Ltd. However, he feels that there is no requirement for any disclosure to be made in
ABC Ltd.'s financial statements since the transaction is carried out on normal commercial
terms and is totally insignificant to ABC Ltd., as it represents less than 1% of ABC Ltd.'s
purchases.
Provide answers to the query raised by the Managing Director Mr. Y as per Ind AS.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.31
Answers
1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
If Mr. X controls or jointly controls A Limited, B Limited is related to A Limited when
Ms. Y has control, joint control or significant influence over B Limited.
If Mr. X controls or jointly controls A Limited, A Limited is related to B Limited when
Ms. Y has control, joint control or significant influence over B Limited.
No, significant influence does not lead to direct/indirect control between the A Ltd.
& B Ltd. i.e., if Mr. X has significant influence (but not control or joint control) over
Entity A and Ms. Y has significant influence (but not control or joint control) over Entity
B, Entities A and B are not related to each other.
Mr. X
Entity A
Domestic Partner
Investment
Ms Y
Investment
Entity B
If Mr X is a member of the key management personnel of Entity A and Ms Y is a
member of the key management personnel of Entity B, Entities A and B are not, in the
absence of any other indicator of a related party relationship, related to each other.
C Limited is related to B Limited and A Limited
2.
(a)
(b)
B Limited is related to C Limited and A Limited.
3.
XYZ Ltd. would include the total revenue of 68,00,000 (₹60,00,000 + ₹8,00,000) from
ABC Ltd. received / receivable in the year ended 31st March 20X2 within its revenue and
show 18,00,000 within trade receivables at 31st March 20X2.
Mrs. P would be regarded as a related party of XYZ Ltd. because she is a close family
member of one of the key management personnel of XYZ Ltd.
From 1st June 20X1, ABC Ltd. would also be regarded as a related party of XYZ Ltd.
because from that date ABC Ltd. is an entity controlled by another related party.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.32
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
Because ABC Ltd. is a related party with whom XYZ Ltd. has transactions, then XYZ Ltd.
should disclose:
The nature of the related party relationship.
The revenue of 60,00,000 from ABC Ltd. since 1st June 20X1.
The outstanding balance of 18,00,000 at 31st March 20X2.
In the current circumstances it may well be necessary for XYZ Ltd. to also disclose the
favourable terms under which the transactions are carried out.
As per paragraph 9 of Ind AS 24, Related Party Disclosures, "Key management personnel
are those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling
the activities of the entity, directly or indirectly, including any director (whether executive or
otherwise) of that entity."
Accordingly, key management personnel (KMP) includes any director of the entity who are
having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the activities of the
entity. Hence, independent director Mr. Atul and non-executive director Mr. Naveen are
covered under the definition of KMP in accordance with Ind AS.
Also as per paragraph 7 and 9 of Ind AS 19, 'Employee Benefits', an employee may provide
services to an entity on a full-time, part-time, permanent, casual or temporary basis. For the
purpose of the Standard, Employees include directors and other management personnel.
Therefore, contention of the Accountant is wrong that they are not employees of X Ltd.
Hence, they should be reported as related party.
Further, paragraph 17 of Ind AS requires disclosure about employee benefits for key
management personnel. Therefore, an entity shall disclose key management personnel
compensation in total i.e. disclosure of directors' fee of $(\vec{r}10,00,000+\overline{\times}7,50,000)$
17,50,000 is to be made as employees benefits (under various categories).
Since short-term employee benefits are expected to be settled wholly before twelve months
after the end of the annual reporting period in which the employees render the related
services, the sitting fee paid to directors will fall under it (as per Ind AS 19) and is required to
be disclosed in accordance with the paragraph 17 of Ind AS 24.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 24
8.33
Ongoing through the queries raised by the Managing Director Mr. Y, the financial controller
Mr. X explained the notes and reasons for their disclosures as follows:
Related parties are generally characterised by the presence of control or influence between
the two parties.
Ind AS 24 'Related Party Disclosures' identifies related parties as, inter alia, key management
personnel and companies controlled by key management personnel. On this basis, PQR Ltd.
is a related party of ABC Ltd.
The transaction is required to be disclosed in the financial statements of ABC Ltd. since
Mr. Y is Key Management personnel of ABC Ltd. Also at the same time, it owns 100% shares
of PQR Ltd. i.e. he controls PQR Ltd. This implies that PQR Ltd. is a related party of ABC
Ltd.
Where transactions occur with related parties, Ind AS 24 requires that details of the
transactions are disclosed in Notes to the financial statements. This is required even if the
transactions are carried out on an arm's length basis.
Transactions with related parties are material by their nature, so the fact that the transaction
may be numerically insignificant to ABC Ltd. does not affect the need for disclosure.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
