CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
UNIT 6:
13.143
IND AS 28: INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES AND JOINT
VENTURES
6.1 OBJECTIVE OF IND AS 28
Ind AS 28 prescribes following:
guidance on accounting of investments in associates and
the requirements for the application of the equity method when accounting for investments
in associates and joint ventures.
6.2 SCOPE OF IND AS 28
Ind AS 28 shall be applied by all entities that are
investors with joint control of an investee (i.e. the investee is a joint venture of the investor),
or
significant influence over an investee (i.e. the investee is an associate of the investor).
6.3 SIGNIFICANT INFLUENCE
An associate is an entity over which the investor has significant influence. Hence, to assess
whether an investee is an associate or not, an entity needs to understand the term 'significant
influence'.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions
of the investee but is not control or joint control of those policies.
In this section, we will discuss following concepts related to assessment of significant influence:
Presumption of significant influence
➤
Judgement required in assessment of significant influence
➤
Consideration of potential voting rights when assessing significant influence
Loss of significant influence
Each of the above concepts are discussed in detail below.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.144
FINANCIAL REPORTING
6.3.1 Presumption of significant influence
Presumption of significant influence:
If an entity holds (directly or indirectly through a subsidiary) 20% or more of the voting
rights of an investee then it is presumed that the entity has significant influence, unless
it can be clearly demonstrated that it is not the case.
➤ Conversely, if the entity holds, (directly or indirectly through a subsidiary), less than 20% of
the voting power of the investee, it is presumed that the entity does not have significant
influence, unless such influence can be clearly demonstrated.
It should be noted that a substantial or majority ownership by another investor does not
necessarily preclude an entity from having significant influence.
Illustration 1: Significant influence
E Ltd. holds 25% of the voting power of an investee. The balance 75% of the voting power is held
by three other investors each holding 25%.
The decisions about the financing and operating policies of the investee are taken by investors
holding majority of the voting power. Since, the other three investors together hold majority voting
power, they generally take the decisions without taking the consent of E Ltd. Even if E Ltd.
proposes any changes to the financing and operating policies of the investee, the other three
investors do not vote in favour of those changes. So, in effect the suggestions of E Ltd. are not
considered while taking decisions related to financing and operating policies.
Determine whether E Ltd. has significant influence over the investee?
Solution:
Since E Ltd. is holding more than 20% of the voting power of the investee, it indicates that E Ltd.
might have significant over the investee. However, the other investors in the investee prevent
E Ltd. from participating in the financing and operating policy decisions of the investee. Hence, in
this case, E Ltd. is not in a position to have significant influence over the investee.
*****
6.3.2 Judgement required in assessment of significant influence
The assessment of whether the investor has significant influence over the investee requires
application of judgement. In making such judgement, the investor shall consider following factors
which generally demonstrate the existence of significant influence:
a) representation on the board of directors or equivalent governing body of the investee
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
Illustration 2: Representation on board
13.145
Kuku Ltd. holds 12% of the voting shares in Boho Ltd. Boho Ltd.'s board comprise of eight
members and two of these members are appointed by Kuku Ltd. Each board member has
one vote at meeting. is Boho Ltd an associate of Kuku Ltd?
Solution:
Boho Ltd is an associate of Kuku Ltd as significant influence is demonstrated by the
presence of directors on the board and the relative voting rights at meetings.
It is presumed that entity has significant influence where it holds 20% or more of the voting
power of the investee, but it is not necessary to have 20% representation on the board to
demonstrate significant influence, as this will depend on all the facts and circumstances.
One board member may represent significant influence even if that board member has less
than 20% of the voting power. But for significant influence to exist it would be necessary to
show based on specific facts and circumstances that this is the case, as significant
influence would not be presumed.
*****
b) participation in policy-making processes, including participation in decisions about
dividends or other distributions
Illustration 3: Participation in policy-making processes
M Ltd. holds 10% of the voting power an investee. The balance 90% voting power is held
by nine other investors each holding 10%.
The decisions about the relevant activities (except decision about taking borrowings) of the
investee are taken by the members holding majority of the voting power. The decisions
about taking borrowings are required to be taken by unanimous consent of all the investors.
Further, decisions about taking borrowing are not the decisions that most significantly affect
the returns of the investee.
Determine whether M Ltd. has significant influence over the investee?
Solution:
In this case, though M Ltd. is holding less than 20% of the voting power of the investee,
M Ltd.'s consent is required to take decisions about taking borrowings which is one of the
relevant activities. Further, since the decisions about taking borrowing are not the decisions
that most significantly affect the returns of the investee, it cannot be said that all the
investors have joint control over the investee.
Hence, it can be said that M Ltd. has significant influence over the investee.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.146
FINANCIAL REPORTING
c) material transactions between the entity and its investee
Illustration 4: Material transactions between the entity and its investee
RS Ltd. is an entity engaged in the business of pharmaceuticals. It has invested in the
share capital of an investee XY Ltd. and is holding 15% of XY Ltd.'s total voting power.
XY Ltd. is engaged in the business of producing packing materials for pharmaceutical
entities. One of the incentives for RS Ltd. to invest in XY Ltd. was the fact that XY Ltd. is
engaged in the business of producing packing materials which is also useful for RS Ltd.
Since last many years, XY Ltd.'s almost 90% of the output is procured by RS Ltd.
Determine whether RS Ltd. has significant influence over XY Ltd.?
Solution:
Since 90% of the output of XY Ltd. is procured by RS Ltd., XY Ltd. would be dependent on
RS Ltd. for the continuation of its business. Hence, even though RS Ltd. is holding only
15% of the voting power of XY Ltd. it has significant influence over XY Ltd.
d) interchange of managerial personnel
*****
Illustration 5: Interchange of managerial personnel
Entity X and entity Y operate in the same industry, but in different geographical regions.
Entity X acquires a 10% shareholding in entity Y as a part of a strategic agreement. A new
production process is key to serve a fundamental change in the strategic direction of entity
Y. The terms of agreement provide for entity Y to start a new production process under
the supervision of two managers from entity X. The managers seconded from entity X, one
of whom is on entity X's board, will oversee the selection and recruitment of new staff, the
purchase of new equipment, the training of the workforce and the negotiation of new
purchase contracts for raw materials. The two managers will report directly to entity Y's
board and as well as to entity X. Analyse.
Solution:
The secondment of the board member and a senior manager from entity X to entity Y gives
entity X a range of power over a new production process and may evidence that entity X
has significant influence over entity Y. This assessment takes into the account what are
the key financial and operating policies of entity Y and the influence this gives entity X over
those policies.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
e) provision of essential technical information
Illustration 6: Provision of essential technical information
13.147
R Ltd. is a tyre manufacturing entity. The entity has entered into a technology transfer
agreement with another entity Y Ltd. which is also involved in the business of tyre
manufacturing. R Ltd. is an established entity in this business whereas Y Ltd. is a relatively
new entity.
As per the agreement, R Ltd. has granted to Y Ltd. a license to use its technical information
and know-how which are related to the processes for the manufacture of tyres. Y Ltd. is
dependent on the technical information and know-how supplied by R Ltd. because of its
lack of expertise and experience in this business. Further, R Ltd. has also invested in 10%
of the equity share capital of Y Ltd.
Determine whether R Ltd. has significant influence over Y Ltd.?
Solution:
Y Ltd. obtains essential technical information for the running of its business from R Ltd.
Hence R Ltd. has significant influence over Y Ltd. despite of holding only 10% of the equity
share capital of Y Ltd.
*****
6.3.3 Consideration of potential voting rights when assessing
significant influence
An entity may own potential voting rights such as share warrants, share call options, convertible
instruments, or other similar instruments that can give the entity additional voting power or reduce
another party's voting power over the investee.
Potential voting rights that are currently exercisable are considered when assessing whether
an entity has significant influence. Potential voting rights that are currently not exercisable are not
considered for the assessment. This can be the case when the rights cannot be exercised until a
future date or until the occurrence of a future event.
In assessing whether potential voting rights contribute to significant influence, the entity examines
all facts and circumstances except (a) the intentions of management and (b) the financial ability
to exercise those potential rights.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.148
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 7: Potential voting rights
An entity which is currently holding 10% of the voting power of an entity has an option of purchase
additional 15% voting power of the investee from other investors. However, the entity currently
does not have financial ability to purchase additional 15% voting power of the investee. Determine
whether the entity has significant influence over the investee?
Solution:
Considering the potential voting rights, the entity can have more than 20% of the voting power of
the investee and hence it is presumed that the entity has significant influence over the investee.
The fact that the entity does not have financial ability to purchase such additional voting power is
not considered in such assessment (It should be noted that under Ind AS 110, potential voting
rights which an entity cannot exercise because of its financial ability are not considered as
substantive and hence not factored in the assessment. However, under Ind AS 28, there is no
such requirement given. Hence the potential voting rights, even if they are not substantive as per
Ind AS 110, are included in the assessment of significant influence.)
6.3.4 Loss of significant influence
*****
An entity loses significant influence over an investee when it loses the power to participate in
the financial and operating policy decisions of that investee.
The loss of significant influence can occur with or without a change in ownership levels. For
example, loss of significant influence can occur when an associate becomes subject to the control
of a government, court, administrator or regulator. It could also occur as a result of a contractual
arrangement.
6.4 EQUITY METHOD
The equity method is a method of accounting whereby the investment is initially recognised at
cost and adjusted thereafter for the post-acquisition change in the investor's share of the
investee's net assets. The investor's profit or loss includes its share of the investee's profit or loss
and the investor's other comprehensive income includes its share of the investee's other
comprehensive income. In this section, we will discuss following principles related to equity
method of accounting:
Application of the equity method
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
Exemptions from applying the equity method
Equity method procedure
The above principles are explained below.
6.4.1 Application of the equity method
13.149
An investor is required to account its investments in associates and joint ventures as per equity
method.
It should be noted that equity method is not applied for accounting of investments in associates
and joint ventures in the separate financial statements of the investor. In separate financial
statements, an investor shall apply the guidance given in Ind AS 27 which is discussed in detail
in unit 7.
Under the equity method of accounting, an investor shall pass following entries at various stages
of investment:
1)
Initial entry to record investment done in associate or joint venture at cost
2)
3)
Recording of investor's share in the profit / loss of the associate or joint venture after the
date of acquisition
Recording of investor's share in the other comprehensive income of the associate or joint
venture after the date of acquisition
4) Distributions received from an investee
Above entries are explained by way of an illustration below:
Illustration 8: Accounting entries related investment in associate / joint venture
On the first day of a financial year, A Ltd. invested in the equity share capital of B Ltd. at a cost
of  1,00,000 to acquire 25% share in the voting power of B Ltd. A Ltd. has concluded that B Ltd.
is an associate of A Ltd. At the end of the year, B Ltd. earned profit of  10,000 and other
comprehensive income of  2,000. In that year, B Ltd. also declared dividend to the extent of
4,000. Pass necessary entries in the books of A Ltd. to account for the investment in associate.
Solution:
Following entries would be passed in the books of A Ltd.:
1) Initial entry to record investment done in associate
Investment in B Ltd. A/c
To Bank A/c
Dr. 1,00,000
1,00,000
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.150
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2) Recording of share in the profit of the associate
*****
It should be noted that Ind AS 28 not only requires to record the income distributed by the
associate or joint venture but it also requires an investor to record its share in the profit / loss of
the associate or joint venture (which may not be yet distributed). This provides more informative
reporting of the investor's net assets and profit or loss.
Potential voting rights
Generally, an entity accounts for its interest in an associate or joint venture on the basis of existing
ownership interests and the possible effect of exercise or conversion of any potential voting
rights are not considered for applying equity method. Instruments with such potential voting
rights are accounted for as per Ind AS 109.
For example, if potential voting rights are contained in Compulsorily Convertible Preference
Shares (CCPS) of the investee and such CCPS do not give present access to returns associated
with ownership interests (refer below), then such CCPS shall be accounted for as per Ind AS 109
(refer chapter 12) i.e. either at fair value through profit or loss or at fair value through other
comprehensive income.
However, there can be some cases where the potential voting rights in substance currently give
access to the returns associated with an ownership interest in an associate or a joint venture. In
such cases, the investor shall account for instruments with such potential voting rights as per
equity method and not as per Ind AS 109. This can be the situation where, for example, an
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.151
investor has a purchase option to acquire additional voting power in an investee and the terms of
the contract provides that the investor will also get the share in the profit / loss of the investee
even for the period prior to the date of actual exercise of the option.
6.4.2 Exemptions from applying the equity method
An entity need not apply the equity method to its investment in an associate or a joint venture in
following cases:
Exemption 1
As per paragraph 17 of Ind AS 28, an entity need not apply equity method if the entity is a parent
that is exempt from preparing consolidated financial statements by the scope exception in
paragraph 4(a) of Ind AS 110 or if all the following apply:
The above conditions are similar to the conditions given in paragraph 4(a) of Ind AS 110. To see
illustration of above conditions, refer to the scope exemption illustrations give in unit 3 on
Ind AS 110.
Exemption 2
When an investment in an associate or a joint venture is held by, or is held indirectly through, an
entity that is a venture capital organisation, or a mutual fund, unit trust and similar entities
including investment-linked insurance funds, the entity may elect to measure investments in
those associates and joint ventures at fair value through profit or loss in accordance with
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.152
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Ind AS 109. An example of an investment-linked insurance fund is a fund held by an entity
as the underlying items for a group of insurance contracts with direct participation features.
For the purposes of this election, insurance contracts include investment contracts with
discretionary participation features. Such election shall be made separately for each associate
or joint venture at time of its initial recognition.
Example 1
A mutual fund has invested in the equity share capital of certain companies in excess of 20% of
the total equity share of those entities. Hence, those investees are presumed to be an associate
of the mutual fund. In this case, the mutual fund can decide not to apply equity method to account
for those investments and instead measure them at fair value through profit or loss as per Ind AS
109.
Exemption 3
When an entity has an investment in an associate, a portion of which is held indirectly through a
venture capital organisation, or a mutual fund, unit trust and similar entities including investment-
linked insurance funds, the entity may elect to measure that portion of the investment in the
associate at fair value through profit or loss in accordance with Ind AS 109.
This is regardless of whether the venture capital organisation has significant influence over that
portion of the investment.
If the entity makes that election, the entity shall apply the equity method to any remaining portion
of its investment in an associate that is not held through a venture capital organisation.
This exemption is explained in below illustration:
Illustration 9: Exemption from applying equity method
MNO Ltd. holds 15% of the voting power of DEF Ltd. PQR Mutual Fund (which is a subsidiary of
MNO Ltd.) also holds 10% voting power of DEF Ltd. Hence, MNO Ltd. holds total 25% voting
power of DEF Ltd. (15% held by own and 10% held by subsidiary) and accordingly has significant
influence over DEF Ltd. How should MNO Ltd. account for investment in DEF Ltd. in its
consolidated financial statements?
Solution:
The 15% interest which is held directly by MNO Ltd. should be measured as per equity method of
accounting. However, with respect to the 10% interest which is held through a mutual fund,
MNO Ltd. can avail the exemption from applying the equity method to that 10% interest and
instead measure that investment at fair value through profit or loss. To summarise, the total
interest of 25% in DEF Ltd. should be measured as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.153
15% interest held directly by MNO Ltd.: Measure as per equity method of accounting
10% interest held indirectly through a mutual fund: Measure as per equity method of
accounting or at fair value thorough profit or loss as per Ind AS 109
6.4.3 Equity method procedure
*****
Many of the concepts used in applying the equity method of accounting are similar to the concepts
used for consolidation procedure for subsidiaries. Following is the summary of various concepts
used in applying the equity method of accounting:
Calculation of goodwill / capital reserve on acquisition of investment in associate or joint venture and
calculation of share in profit / loss of associate or joint venture
Determination group's share in an associate or a joint venture
Accounting of upstream and downstream transactions between the entity and its associate or joint venture
Accounting of contribution of non-monetary asset by an entity to its associate or joint venture
How to deal with different reporting periods of the entity and its associate or joint venture?
Requirement to have uniform accounting policies
What are the long-term interests in associate or joint venture apart from equity investment?
How to account for share in losses of loss making associate or joint venture in excess of value interest in
the associate or joint venture?
Each of the above concepts are explained below.
6.4.3.1 Calculation of goodwill / capital reserve and calculation of share in profit /
loss of associate or joint venture
An investment is accounted for using the equity method from the date on which it becomes an
associate or a joint venture.
On acquisition of the investment, an entity shall identify the goodwill or capital reserve.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.154
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Goodwill
Any excess of the cost of the investment
over the entity's share of the net fair value
of the investee's identifiable assets and
liabilities is treated as goodwill. Goodwill is
included in the carrying amount of the
investment. Amortisation of that goodwill is
not permitted.
Capital reserve
Any excess of the entity's share of the net
fair value of the investee's identifiable
assets and liabilities over the cost of the
investment is treated as capital reserve. It
is recorded directly in equity.
While recording the entity's share in the profit / loss of the investee, the entity needs to make
certain adjustment to that share of profit / loss. For example, adjustment shall be made for:
➤ depreciation of the depreciable assets based on their fair values at the acquisition date.
➤ impairment losses such as for goodwill or property, plant and equipment.
Illustration 10: Acquisition of interest in an associate
Blue Ltd. acquired 25% of the equity share capital of Green Ltd. on the first day of the financial
year for 1,25,000. As of that date, the carrying value of the net assets of Green Ltd. was
3,00,000 and the fair value was ₹4,00,000. The excess of fair value over the carrying value
was attributable to one of the buildings owned by Green Ltd. having a remaining useful life of 20
years. Green Ltd. earned profit of 40,000 and other comprehensive income of  10,000 during
the year. Calculate the goodwill / capital reserve on the date of acquisition, Blue Ltd.'s share in
the profit and other comprehensive income for the year and closing balance of investment at the
end of the year.
Solution:
(1) Goodwill / capital reserve on the date of acquisition
The cost of the investment is higher than the net fair value of the investee's identifiable assets
and liabilities. Hence there is goodwill. Amount of goodwill is calculated as follows
Above goodwill will be recorded as part of carrying amount of the investment.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.155
(2)
Share in profit and other comprehensive income of Green Ltd.
(3)
Closing balance of investment at the end of the year
*****
Illustration 11: Cumulative preference shares issued by associate or joint venture
KL Ltd. has invested in 50% voting power of a joint venture MN Ltd. MN Ltd. has also issued 10%
cumulative preference shares, classified as equity, to other investors worth  10,00,000. During
the year, MN Ltd. earned profit of ₹4,00,000. Also, MN Ltd. has not declared any dividend on the
preference shares for current year. Calculate KL Ltd.'s share in the net profit of MN Ltd. for the
year.
Solution:
If an associate or a joint venture has outstanding cumulative preference shares that are held by
parties other than the entity and are classified as equity, the entity should compute its share of profit
or loss after adjusting for dividend on such shares, whether or not the dividends have been declared.
In current case, KL Ltd.'s share in net profit of MN Ltd. would be as follows.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
13.156
FINANCIAL REPORTING
6.4.3.2 Group's share in an associate or a joint venture
For applying the equity method, an entity shall consider the share held by it directly or indirectly
(through a subsidiary) in an associate or a joint venture. The holding by the entity's associate
or joint venture in another associate or joint venture of the entity is ignored for this purpose.
Example 2
A Ltd., its subsidiary B Ltd. and its joint venture C Ltd. holds 15%, 10% and 10% respectively of
the share capital of an associate X Ltd. Hence, to apply equity method, A Ltd. shall consider the
interest held by it and by its subsidiary B Ltd. i.e. total interest of 25%. It shall not consider the
interest held by C Ltd. which is a joint venture.
When an associate or a joint venture has subsidiaries, associates or joint ventures, the profit
or loss, other comprehensive income and net assets taken into account in applying the equity
method are those recognised in the associate's or joint venture's financial statements which
include the associate's or joint venture's share of the profit or loss, other comprehensive income
and net assets of its associates and joint ventures.
Example 3
X Ltd. has an associate P Ltd. P Ltd. has further invested in a subsidiary Q Ltd. and a joint venture
R Ltd. Hence, for the purpose of applying the equity method, X Ltd. shall consider the consolidated
financial statements of P Ltd.
Illustration 12: Share in the consolidated financial statements of associate
Entity A holds a 20% equity interest in Entity B (as associate) that in turn has a 100% equity
interest in Entity C. Entity B recognised net assets relating to Entity C of  1,000 in its consolidated
financial statements. Entity B sells 20% of its interest in Entity C to a third party (a non-controlling
shareholder) for 300 and recognises this transaction as an equity transaction in accordance with
paragraph 23 of Ind AS 110, resulting in a credit in Entity B's equity of  100.
The financial statements of Entity A and Entity B are summarised as follows before and after the
transaction:
Before
A's consolidated financial statements
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
13.157
OF GROUP ENTITIES
B's consolidated financial statements
The financial statements of B after the transaction are summarised below:
After
B's consolidated financial statements
Although Entity A did not participate in the transaction, Entity A's share of net assets in Entity B
increased as a result of the sale of B's 20% interest in C. Effectively, A's share in B's net assets
is now 220 (20% of 1,100) i.e. 20 in addition to its previous share.
How is an equity transaction that is recognised in the financial statements of Entity B reflected in
the consolidated financial statements of Entity A that uses the equity method to account for its
investment in Entity B?
Solution:
The change of interest in the net assets / equity of the associate as a result of the investee's
equity transaction is reflected in the investor's financial statements as 'share of other changes in
equity of investee' (in the statement of changes in equity) instead of gain in Statement of profit
and loss, since it reflects the post-acquisition change in the net assets of the investee and also
faithfully reflects the investor's share of the associate's transaction as presented in the associate's
consolidated financial statements.
Thus, in the given case, Entity A recognises 20 as change in other equity instead of in statement
of profit and loss and maintains the same classification as of its associate, Entity B, i.e., a direct
credit to equity as in its consolidated financial statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
13.158
FINANCIAL REPORTING
6.4.3.3 Upstream and downstream transactions between the entity and its associate
or joint venture
An entity (or a subsidiary of the entity) may enter into upstream or downstream transactions with
its associate or joint venture.
'Upstream' transactions are, for example, sales of assets from an associate or a joint
venture to the investor.
'Downstream' transactions are, for example, sales or contributions of assets from the
investor to its associate or its joint venture.
There may be some gain / loss resulting from such transactions. The entity shall record such gain/
loss in its financial statements only to the extent of the unrelated investors' interests in the
associate or joint venture.
Illustration 13: Upstream and downstream transaction between an entity and its associate
Scenario A
M Ltd. has invested in 40% share capital of N Ltd. and hence N Ltd. is an associate of M Ltd.
During the year, N Ltd. sold inventory to M Ltd. for a value of  10,00,000. This included profit of
10% on the transaction price i.e. profit of  1,00,000. Out the above inventory, M Ltd. sold
inventory of  6,00,000 to outside customers. Hence, the inventory of ₹4,00,000 purchased from
N Ltd. is still lying with M Ltd. Determine the unrealised profit to be eliminated on above
transaction.
Scenario B
Assume the same facts as per Scenario A except that the inventory is sold by M Ltd. to N Ltd.
instead of N Ltd. selling to M Ltd. Determine the unrealised profit to be eliminated on above
transaction.
Solution:
Scenario A
Firstly, as part of its equity method accounting for investment in N Ltd., M Ltd. will pass this journal
entry:
Investment in N Ltd.
Dr. 40,000
To Share in profit of N Ltd.
40,000
Out of the inventory of 10,00,000, M Ltd. has sold inventory worth 6,00,000 to outside
customers. Hence, the profit of ₹ 60,000 (6,00,000 x 10% profit margin) on such inventory is
realised. However, the inventory worth 4,00,000 is still held by M Ltd. which consists profit of
 40,000 (4,00,000 x 10%). Hence, M Ltd.'s share in such profit i.e.  16,000 $(40,000\times40\%)$ is
considered as unrealised.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.159
Accordingly, after recording of share in total profit of N Ltd., M Ltd. should pass following
adjustment entry to reverse the unrealised profit margin:
Share in profit of N Ltd.
Dr.
16,000
To Inventory / Investment in N Ltd.
16,000
In subsequent period, when this inventory of
4,00,000 is sold by N Ltd. to an outside customer
then the above profit margin of 16,000 will be treated as realised and hence the above entry will
be reversed in that period.
[Note: in the separate financial statements of M Ltd., inventory is carried at 4,00,000 whereas
in its consolidated financial statements, inventory is carried at 3,84,000 (due to elimination entry
above in respect of unrealized profit). In the subsequent period, when the inventory is sold,
Inventory Account is credited by  4,00,000 whereas for the purpose of consolidated financial
statements, it should have been credited by only 3,84,000. The difference is adjusted by
debiting back 16,000 to the Inventory Account and a corresponding recognition of share in profit
of associate.]
Scenario B
Out of the inventory of  10,00,000, N Ltd. has sold inventory worth 6,00,000 to outside
customers. Hence, the profit of ₹60,000 $(6,00,000\times10\%$ profit margin) on such inventory is
realised. However, the inventory worth₹4,00,000 is still held by N Ltd. which consists profit of
 40,000 (4,00,000 x 10%). Out of this profit of 40,000, profit to the extent of other investor's
interest in the investee is treated as realised profit i.e.  24,000 $(40,000\times60\%)$ is treated as
realised profit. Balance profit of  16,000 (40,000 x 40%) is considered as unrealised. Hence, M
Ltd. should pass following adjustment entry to reverse the unrealised profit:
Sales
Dr. 160,000
In subsequent period, when this inventory of  4,00,000 is sold by N Ltd. to an outside customer
then the above profit margin of 16,000 will be treated as realised and hence the above entry will
be reversed in that period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
13.160
FINANCIAL REPORTING
When downstream transactions provide evidence of a reduction in the net realisable value of
the assets to be sold or contributed, or of an impairment loss of those assets, those losses shall
be recognised in full by the investor.
When upstream transactions provide evidence of a reduction in the net realisable value of the
assets to be purchased or of an impairment loss of those assets, the investor shall recognise
its share in those losses.
Illustration 14: Impairment loss on downstream and upstream transaction between an entity
and its joint venture
Scenario A
X Ltd. has invested in a joint venture Y Ltd. by holding 50% of its equity share capital. During the
year, X Ltd. sold an asset to Y Ltd. at its market value of  8,00,000. The asset's carrying value
in X Ltd.'s books was  10,00,000. Determine how should X Ltd. account for the sale transaction
in its books.
Scenario B
Assume the same facts as per Scenario A except that the asset is sold by Y Ltd. to X Ltd. instead
of X Ltd. selling to Y Ltd. Determine how should X Ltd. account for the above transaction in its
books.
Solution:
Scenario A
X Ltd. should record full loss of ₹2,00,000 (10,00,000 – 8,00,000) in its books as that would
represent the impairment loss because the market value has actually declined. This loss would
have been recorded even if X Ltd. had first impaired the asset and then sold to Y Ltd. at zero profit
/ loss. Following entry should be passed in the books of X Ltd.
To Asset
10,00,000
Scenario B
X Ltd. should record loss to the extent of its share in Y Ltd. Hence, X Ltd.'s share in loss i.e.
1,00,000 [(10,00,000 – 8,00,000) x 50%] should be recorded by X Ltd. in its books. The loss
should be recorded since the market value of the asset has actually declined and this would
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.161
represent impairment. This loss would have been recorded even if Y Ltd. would have first recorded
an impairment loss of  2,00,000 and then sold to X Ltd. at zero profit / loss. Following entry
should be passed in the books of X Ltd.
Asset
Share in loss of Y Ltd.
Dr.
8,00,000
Dr.
1,00,000
*****
6.4.3.4 Contribution of non-monetary asset by an entity to its associate or joint
venture
An entity might contribute a non-monetary asset to an associate or a joint venture in exchange of
an equity interest in that associate or joint venture. Such contribution of asset shall be accounted
in accordance with the guidance for downstream transactions discussed above.
However, if such contribution of cnon-monetary asset lacks commercial substance, then the
gain / loss involved in such transaction is treated as unrealised and such gain / loss is eliminated
against the investment value. In other words, the carrying amount of the investment in associate
or joint venture in such a situation will be equal to the carrying amount of non-monetary asset
contributed in exchange. The term 'commercial substance' has the same meaning as defined in
Ind AS 16 'Property, Plant and Equipment' and discussed in unit 2 of chapter 7.
If, in addition to receiving an equity interest in an associate or a joint venture, an entity receives
monetary or non-monetary assets, the entity recognises in full in profit or loss the portion of the
gain or loss on the non-monetary contribution relating to the monetary or non-monetary
assets received.
6.4.3.5 Different reporting periods of the entity and its associate or joint venture
To apply equity method of accounting, an entity shall use the most recent available financial
statements of the associate or joint venture.
When the end date of the reporting period of the entity and that of the associate or joint venture
is different (e.g. entity's financial year ends on 31 March 20X1 but the associate's financial year
ends on 31 December 20X0) then associate or joint venture shall prepare financial statements as
of the period end date of the entity for the purpose of doing equity method accounting by the
entity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.162
FINANCIAL REPORTING
In above situation, if it is impracticable for the associate or joint venture to prepare financial
statements as of the period end date of the entity then the entity can use the financial statements
of associate or joint venture ending on different date subject to giving effect of significant
transactions or events occurring between the end date of the associate's or joint venture's
financial statements and end date of the entity's financial statements.
In no case, the difference between the end date of the reporting period of associate or joint
venture and end date of reporting period of the entity can exceed 3 months.
The length of the reporting periods and any difference between the ends of the reporting periods
shall be the same from period to period. This means that if the financial statements of an associate
or a joint venture used for equity accounting in previous periods were ending on different dates
than that of the entity whereas the financial statements used for current period end on the same
date as that of the entity then the comparatives for previous period should be restated to have
comparison of equivalent periods.
6.4.3.6 Uniform accounting policies
When using the financial statements of an associate or joint venture for doing equity method
accounting, the accounting policies (for like transaction and events in similar circumstances) as
used by associate or joint venture in preparing their financial statements should be same as the
policies used by the entity in preparing its financial statements.
If the accounting policies are not same then adjustments should be made to align the
accounting policies of associate or joint venture to those of the entity.
Example 4
A Ltd. (a company incorporated and registered in India) holds 25% voting power of B Inc. (a
company incorporated and registered in United States). B Inc. is an associate for A Ltd. A Ltd.
Follows Ind AS for the preparation of its financial statements. However, B Inc. follows generally
accepted accounting principles in United States (US GAAP). Hence, while using B Inc.'s financial
statements for the purpose of doing equity method accounting, A Ltd. Shall do necessary
adjustment to covert US GAAP financial statements to Ind AS financial statements and then do
equity method accounting.
There are two exceptions to above rule:
Exception 1
In case of an associate, the adjustment for uniformity of accounting policies with those of the
entity will not be done if it is impracticable to do so.
It is to be noted that this exemption is available in case of an associate only and not available for
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.163
joint venture. This is because for an investor with just significant influence over an investee, it
may be difficult to obtain necessary information to do adjustment for aligning accounting policies.
However, in case of a joint venture, it would be relatively easy to obtain such information as the
investor has joint control over the joint venture.
Exception 2
An entity may have interest in an associate or a joint venture that is an investment entity.
Such an associate or a joint venture may also have interest in one or more subsidiaries. When
this is the case, such associate or joint venture, being an investment entity, would account for
its interest in subsidiaries at fair value. Hence, in such case, the entity can elect to retain the
fair value measurement used by the associate or joint venture.
Such election can be made by the entity separately for each associate or joint venture at the
later of the date on which:
a)
the associate or joint venture is initially recognised
b)
the associate or joint venture becomes an investment entity
c) the associate or joint venture first becomes a parent
6.4.3.7 Long-term interests in associate or joint venture apart from equity investment
An entity might hold financial instruments in an associate or joint venture other than the
investments accounted for using the equity method. These includes long-term interests that, in
substance, form part of the entity's net investment in the associate or joint venture.
For example, an item for which settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable
future is, in substance, an extension of the entity's investment in that associate or joint venture.
•
Such items may include
Ο
Ο
preference shares and
long-term receivables or loans,
•
but do not include
Ο
trade receivables,
Ο
trade payables or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Ο
13.164
FINANCIAL REPORTING
any long-term receivables for which adequate collateral exists, such as secured
loans.
An entity shall account such long-term interest in accordance with Ind AS 109. It is to be noted
that certain requirements of Ind AS 28 also apply to such long-term interests (like allocating share
in loss of associate or joint venture to such interests and testing for impairment and recording of
impairment loss on the net investment in associate or joint venture these are explained in
subsequent paragraphs). However, an entity should first apply Ind AS 109 to those interests and
then apply Ind AS 28 to the balance remaining after applying Ind AS 109.
6.4.3.8 Loss making associate or joint venture
In case of a loss making associate or joint venture, an entity's share of losses of such associate
or joint venture may equal or exceed its interest in the associate or joint venture. In such case,
the entity discontinues recognized its share of further losses.
It should be noted that the interest in the associate or joint venture not only includes the carrying
amount of the investment in the associate or joint venture determined using the equity method but
also includes any long-term interests that, in substance, form part of the entity's net
investment in the associate or joint venture. The examples of such long-term interests are
discussed in 6.4.2.8 above. It should be noted that an entity should first apply Ind AS 109 to
such long-term interests and then apply the above requirement of allocating to such long-term
interest any share in loss of associate or joint venture. Further, while applying Ind AS 109, an
entity shall not take account of any adjustments to the carrying value of long-term interests that
arise from applying Ind AS 28.
Losses recognized using the equity method in excess of the entity's investment in ordinary shares
are applied to the other components of the entity's interest in an associate or a joint venture in
the reverse order of their seniority (i.e. priority in liquidation).
After the entity's interest is reduced to zero, additional losses are provided for, and a liability is
recognized, only to the extent that the entity has incurred legal or constructive obligations or
made payments on behalf of the associate or joint venture.
If the associate or joint venture subsequently reports profits, the entity resumes recognized its
share of those profits only after its share of the profits equals the share of losses not recognized.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
Illustration 15: Loss making associate and long-term interests
An entity has following three type interests in an associate:
13.165
• Equity shares: 25% of the equity shares to which equity method of accounting is applied
• Preference shares: Non-cumulative preference shares that form part of net investment in the
associate. Such preference shares are measured at fair value as per Ind AS 109.
•
Long-term loan: The loan carrying interest of 10% p.a. The interest income is received at
the end of each year. The long-term loan is accounted as per amortised cost as per
Ind AS 109. This loan also forms part of net investment in the associate.
At the start of year 1, the carrying value of each of the above interests is as follows:
• Equity shares - 10,00,000
•
Preference shares  ₹5,00,000
• Long-term loan – ₹3,00,000
Following table summarises the changes in the fair value of preference shares as per
Ind AS 109, impairment loss on long-term loan as per Ind AS 109 and entity's share in profit / loss
of associate for year 1-5.
₹
Throughout year 1 to 5, there has been no objective evidence of impairment in the net investment
in the associate. The entity does not have any legal or constructive obligation to share the losses
of the associate beyond its interest in the associate.
Based on above, determine the closing balance of each of the above interests at the end of each
year.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.166
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution:
Year 1
Below table summarises the closing balance of each of the interest at the end of year 1:
₹
The entire loss of
16,00,000 is recognised. Hence, there is no unrecognised loss at the end of
year 1.
Year 2
Below table summarises the closing balance of each of the interest at the end of year 2:
₹
*
Recognition of changes in fair value as per Ind AS 109 has resulted in the carrying amount of
Preference shares being negative 50,000. Consequently, the entity shall reverse a portion of
the associate's losses previously allocated to Preference shares.
Out of the total loss of ₹2,00,000 for the year, loss of only 50,000 is recognized. Hence, there
is unrecognized loss to the extent of 1,50,000 at the end of year 2.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Year 3
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
13.167
OF GROUP ENTITIES
Below table summarises the closing balance of each of the interest at the end of year 3: ₹
The share in profit / loss for the year is nil. However, there was previously unrecognised loss of
1,50,000 which is allocated in current year. After recognising the above loss, there is no
unrecognised loss at the end of year 3.
Year 4
Below table summarises the closing balance of each of the interest at the end of year 4: ₹
10,00,000. The entity shall allocate such
The entity's share in profit of associate for the year is
profit to each of the instruments in order of their seniority in liquidation. The entity should limit the
amount of profit to be allocated to preference shares and long-term loan to the extent of losses
previously allocated to them. Hence, the entity has allocated 5,00,000 to preference shares and
3,00,000 to long-term debt.
There is no unrecognised loss at the end of year 4.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Year 5
13.168
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Below table summarises the closing balance of each of the interest at the end of year 5:
The entity's share in profit of associate for the year is 10,00,000. The entire profit is allocated
to equity shares since there is no loss previously allocated to either preference shares or long-
term loan.
There is no recognized loss at the end of year 5.
Year 1 to 5
The interest accrual on long-term loan would be done in each year at 10% p.a. This will be done
without taking into account any adjustment done in the carrying value of long-term loan as per
Ind AS 28. Hence, the entity will accrue interest of 30,000 (3,00,000 x 10%) in each year.
*****
6.5 IMPAIRMENT LOSSES
After doing accounting as per equity method explained above, an entity shall determine whether
there is an objective evidence that the entity's net investment in an associate or a joint venture
is impaired.
The objective evidence of impairment can arise as a result of:
one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the net investment (a  loss
event') and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.169
that loss event (or events) has an impact on the estimated future cash flows from the
net investment that can be reliably estimated.
It is not necessary to identify a single event that caused impairment. Rather, impairment can be a
combined effect of several individual events.
Losses expected as a result of future events, no matter how likely, are not recognized.
Objective evidence that the net investment is impaired includes observable data about the
following loss events:
Significant financial difficulty of the associate
or joint venture
Breach of contract, such as a default in
payments by the associate or joint venture
The entity granting a concession to associate
or joint venture (because of its financial
difficulties)
Disappearance of an active market for the net
investment because of financial difficulties of the
associate or joint venture
It becoming probable that the associate or joint
venture will enter bankruptcy or other
financial reorganisation
Adverse effect in the environment
(technological, market, economic or legal) in
which associate or joint venture operates
Significant or prolonged decline in the fair
value of an investment in an equity instrument
below its cost
It should be noted that the disappearance of an active market because the associate's or joint
venture's equity or financial instruments are no longer publicly traded is not evidence of
impairment.
A downgrade of an associate's or joint venture's credit rating or a decline in the fair value of the
associate or joint venture, is not of itself, evidence of impairment, although it may be evidence of
impairment when considered with other available information.
Impairment of goodwill included in carrying value of associate or joint venture
As discussed earlier in this unit, the goodwill on acquisition of associate or joint venture is
recognized as part of the carrying amount of the net investment in associate or joint venture. Such
goodwill is not tested separately for impairment, rather the entire carrying amount of the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.170
FINANCIAL REPORTING
investment is tested for impairment as a single asset when there is objective evidence of
impairment as mentioned above.
Any impairment loss recognized is not allocated to any asset, including goodwill, that forms part
of the carrying amount of the net investment in the associate or joint venture.
Reversal of impairment loss
Any reversal of impairment loss is recognized in accordance with Ind AS 36 'Impairment of Assets'
to the extent that the recoverable amount of the net investment subsequently increases.
Determining value in use
Impairment loss is provided by comparing the recoverable amount (higher of value in use and fair
value less costs of disposal) with the carrying amount of the investment.
For above purpose, an entity can determine the value in use in either of the following ways:
a) Method 1: Values in use shall include entity's share in the present value of estimated future
cash flows expected to be generated by the associate or joint venture, including:
i.
cash flows from the operations of the associate or joint venture and
ii.
proceeds from the ultimate disposal of the investment
b)
Method 2: Value in use shall include the present value of estimated future cash flows
expected to arise from:
i.
dividends to be received and
ii. proceeds from the ultimate disposal of the investment.
If appropriate assumptions are used then both the above methods will give the same results.
The recoverable amount of an investment in an associate or a joint venture shall be assessed for
each associate or joint venture separately, unless the associate or joint venture does not generate
cash inflows from continuing use that are largely independent of those from other assets of the entity.
6.6 DISCONTINUING THE USE OF THE EQUITY METHOD
An entity shall discontinue the use of the equity method from the date when its investment ceases
to be an associate or a joint venture
The accounting consequences when an investment ceases to be an associate or a joint venture
are explained below.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.171
Investment becomes a subsidiary
If the investment becomes a subsidiary, the entity shall account for its investment in accordance
with Ind AS 103 and Ind AS 110. Ind AS 103 requires revaluation of the previously held interest
in the equity accounted investment at its acquisition date fair value, with recognition of any gain
or loss in profit or loss.
Retained interest in the former associate or joint venture is a financial asset
Retained interest in the former associate or joint venture that is a financial asset shall be measured
at fair value. The entity shall recognise in profit or loss any difference between:
the fair value of any retained interest and any proceeds from disposing of a part interest in
the associate or joint venture; and
the carrying amount of the investment at the date the equity method was discontinued.
Following illustration explains how an entity shall record in profit or loss any gain / loss on
discontinuation of equity method in such case.
Illustration 16: Recording in profit or loss of the gain / loss on discontinuation of equity
method
CD Ltd. held 50% of the voting power of RS Ltd. which is a joint venture of CD Ltd. The carrying
value of the investment in RS Ltd. is ₹1,00,000. Now out of the 50% stake, CD Ltd. has sold 20%
stake in RS Ltd. to a third party for a consideration of  80,000. The fair value of the retained
30% interest is  1,20,000. Determine how much gain / loss should be recorded in profit or loss
of CD Ltd.
Solution:
CD Ltd. shall record in profit or loss difference between below:
the fair value of any retained interest (i.e.  1,20,000) and any proceeds from disposing of
a part interest in the joint venture (i.e. ₹80,000); and
the carrying amount of the investment at the date the equity method was discontinued (i.e.
 1,00,000).
Hence, CD Ltd. shall record gain of 1,00,000 in profit or loss.
*****
Reclassification of items recorded in other comprehensive income
On discontinuation of equity method, any share in the other comprehensive income of associate
or joint venture that was previously recognized by the entity shall be reclassified to profit or loss
on the same basis as would have been required if the investee had directly disposed of the related
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.172
FINANCIAL REPORTING
assets or liabilities.
Example 5
An investor has recognised in past in its other comprehensive income its share of 10,000 in the
cumulative exchange differences relating to a foreign operation of its associate. Now, the
investment in that associate is sold and equity method of accounting is stopped. So, the investor
shall reclassify the cumulative exchange differences of  10,000 recorded in its other
comprehensive income to profit or loss.
The above principle also applies in case there is a reduction in the ownership interest in an
associate or joint venture but the investee still continues to be an associate or joint venture. In
that case, the reclassification should be done in proportion to the reduction in the ownership
interest.
It may be noted that while it is not explicitly stated in Ind AS 28, it can be inferred that in case
there is a reduction in the ownership interest in an associate or joint venture but the investee still
continues to be an associate or joint venture, the entity should recognize gain or loss. This
accounting treatment is different from the accounting for changes in ownership interest interests
in a subsidiary, without losing control.
An associate becomes a joint venture and vice versa
If an investment in an associate becomes an investment in a joint venture or an investment in a
joint venture becomes an investment in an associate, the entity continues to apply the equity
method and does not remeasure the retained interest.
6.7 CLASSIFICATION OF INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATE OR
JOINT VENTURE AS HELD FOR SALE
An entity shall apply Ind AS 105 'Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations'
to an investment, or a portion of an investment, in an associate or a joint venture that meets the
criteria to be classified as held for sale.
Any retained portion of an investment in an associate or a joint venture that has not been
classified as held for sale shall be accounted as follows:
Till the time disposal of the portion that is classified as held for sale takes place:
Accounted using equity method
Ο
After the disposal of the portion that is classified as held for sale takes place
Accounted as follows:
Ο
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.173
Whether the retained interest continues to be an associate or a joint venture?
No
Yes
Account as per requirements
of Ind AS 109
The above requirements are explained in below illustration:
Illustration 17: Investment in joint venture held for sale
Account using equity method
Ram Ltd. holds 50% of the equity share capital of Shyam Ltd. The balance 50% equity share
capital is held by another investor. Ram Ltd. has joint control over Shyam Ltd. and it is a joint
venture of Ram Ltd., accounted using equity method. Now Ram Ltd. is planning to sell 10% of
the equity share capital of Shyam Ltd. to a third party. Such 10% investment meets the criteria of
an asset held for sale and has been measured and disclosed accordingly. Now determine how
should Ram Ltd. account 40% interest retained in Shyam Ltd.
Solution:
Till the time 10% stake is sold, Ram Ltd. shall account for the retained interest of 40% as per
equity method. After the sale of 10% investment, if Ram Ltd. still has joint control over
Shyam Ltd. (e.g. through contractual arrangement) then it shall continue to measure that
investment using equity method. However, if Ram Ltd. is not going to have joint control over
Shyam Ltd. post the disposal of 10% investment then retained investment of 40% shall be
accounted as per Ind AS 109.
*****
When an investment, or a portion of investment, in associate or a joint venture previously classified
as held for sale no longer meets the criteria to be so classified, it shall be accounted for using
the equity method retrospectively as from the date of its classification as held for sale. Financial
statements for the prior periods shall be amended accordingly.
6.8 SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN IND AS 28 FROM IAS 28
RESULTING INTO CARVE OUT
As per IFRS
IAS 28 (paragraph 35) requires that for the purpose of applying equity method of accounting in
the preparation of investor's financial statements, uniform accounting policies should be used. In
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.174
FINANCIAL REPORTING
other words, if the associate's accounting policies are different from those of the investor, the
investor should change the financial statements of the associate by using same accounting
policies.
Carve out
In Ind AS 28 (paragraph 35), the phrase, 'unless impracticable to do so' has been added in the
relevant requirements.
Reason
Certain associates, e.g., regional rural banks (RRBs), being associates of nationalized banks,
may not be in a position to use the Ind AS as these may be too advanced for the RRBs.
Accordingly, the above-stated words have been included to exempt such associates.
6.9 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN IND AS 28 AND
AS 23
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.175
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
13.176
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CONSOLIDATED AND SEPARATE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OF GROUP ENTITIES
13.177
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
