8.34
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT 2 :
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33 : EARNINGS
PER SHARE
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
☐
Understand the objectives behind calculation and disclosure of EPS
Define the terms used in the Standard such as basic EPS, dilution, anti-
dilution, contingent share agreement, potential ordinary shares, etc.
Work out the basic EPS after considering the important points for
calculation of earnings and weighted average number of shares
Determine the diluted EPS after considering the important points for
calculation of diluted earnings and weighted average number of shares
Deal with various peculiar situations of potential ordinary shares,
contingently convertible shares, etc.
Disclose the information regarding EPS in the financial statements
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
UNIT OVERVIEW
Basic EPS
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.35
Ind AS 33 Earnings per share
Measurement
Presentation
Diluted EPS
Disclosure
Earnings
Effect
preference
dividend
Effect
Shares
of
of
Cumulative and
non-cumulative
preference
dividend
Early conversion of
Preference shares at
premium
Effect of discounts,
premiums related to
preference shares
Early conversion of
Preference shares at
premium
Earnings
Weighted Average
Number of Shares
Deciding the date for
issue of shares
Change in the number of
shares without change in
value of capital
Contingently
issuable potential
ordinary shares
Shares
Base for calculation
Calculation of Weighted
average to be done
independently for every
period
Shares of subsidiary, Joint
venture or associate
Dilutive potential ordinary
shares
Antidilutive potential
Ordinary shares
Contracts that
may be settled in
ordinary shares or
cash
Options, warrants and their
equivalents
Employee Stock Options
Purchased
options
Written put options
Convertible instruments
Contingently issuable
shares
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.1
8.36
FINANCIAL REPORTING
INTRODUCTION
Earnings per share (EPS) is an important measure of the performance of the company. The equity
shareholders (ordinary shareholders as per Ind AS 33) invest their money in the entity as owners of
the company. They undertake business risks and financial risks along with all allied systematic and
non-systematic risks of the company. Generally, they would expect a higher return as compared to
a debt-holder considering the risks involved on their investments.
EPS is a ratio that is widely used by financial analysts, investors and other users to gauge an entity's
profitability. Its purpose is to indicate how effective an entity has been in using the resources
provided by the ordinary shareholders, and to assess the entity's current net earnings. EPS also
forms the basis for calculating the price-earnings ratio, which is widely used by investors and
analysts to value shares.
2.2
OBJECTIVE
To prescribe principles for the determination and presentation of earnings per share:
Ind AS 33 provides detailed guidelines and lays down the principles about how to calculate earnings,
weighted average number of shares and basic and diluted earnings per share, to facilitate
performance comparisons between:
(i) different entities in the same reporting period:
(ii)
For example, if one needs to check whether Hero Motocorp Limited is doing better than Baja
Auto Limited in terms of profitability, EPS can be considered to be a measure for comparison
of performance.
different reporting periods for the same entity:
One can check the performance of a company over last 5 years using EPS as a benchmark.
2.2.1 Limitation of EPS
Earnings per share data may have limitations because of different accounting policies that
companies might have used for determining 'earnings'.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.37
2.3 SCOPE
This Ind AS shall apply to companies (that have issued ordinary shares) to which Ind AS
notified under the Companies Act apply. In Indian context, the term 'ordinary shares' is
equivalent to 'equity shares'.
An entity that discloses earnings per share shall calculate and disclose earnings per share in
accordance with this Standard.
When an entity presents both consolidated financial statements and separate financial
statements prepared in accordance with Ind AS 110, Consolidated Financial Statements, and
Ind AS 27, Separate Financial Statements, respectively, the disclosures required by this
Standard shall be presented both in the consolidated financial statements and separate
financial statements. In consolidated financial statements such disclosures shall be based on
consolidated information and in separate financial statements such disclosures shall be
based on information given in separate financial statements.
The above mentioned provisions are summarised below in the following table:
2.4
1.
DEFINITIONS
An ordinary share is an equity instrument that is subordinate to all other classes of equity
instruments. Ordinary shares participate in profit for the period only after other types of shares
such as preference shares have participated. An entity may have more than one class of
ordinary shares. Ordinary shares of the same class have the same rights to receive
dividends.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.38
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
In accordance with Ind AS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation, an equity instrument is
defined as a contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity after
deducting all of its liabilities.
A potential ordinary share is a financial instrument or other contract that may entitle its
holder to ordinary shares.
Examples of potential ordinary shares are:
(a)
(b)
(c)
financial liabilities or equity instruments, including preference shares, that are
convertible into ordinary shares;
options and warrants;
shares that would be issued upon the satisfaction of conditions resulting from
contractual arrangements, such as the purchase of a business or other assets.
Contracts that might result in the issue of ordinary shares of the entity to the holder of the
contract, at the option of the issuer or the holder, are potential ordinary shares.
Example 1
ABC & Co has issued preference shares with the option to convert these into an equal
number of ordinary shares in 2 years' time. They represent potential ordinary shares, even
though it is not certain whether the preference shareholders will convert them into equity
shares (since it will depend on the prices of each class of shares at that time). If the price
of the ordinary share is higher than that of the preference shares, the holders will convert,
and will make a profit. If the price is lower, they will not.
Options, warrants and their equivalents are financial instruments that give the holder the
right to purchase ordinary shares.
Put options on ordinary shares are contracts that give the holder the right to sell ordinary
shares at a specified price for a given period.
Dilution is a reduction in earnings per share or an increase in loss per share resulting from
the assumption that convertible instruments are converted, that options or warrants are
exercised, or that ordinary shares are issued upon the satisfaction of specified conditions.
Antidilution is an increase in earnings per share or a reduction in loss per share resulting
from the assumption that convertible instruments are converted, that options or warrants are
exercised, or that ordinary shares are issued upon the satisfaction of specified conditions.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.39
7.
8.
Example 2
ABC Ltd. has interest paying debt which are convertible into ordinary shares at the option
of the entity. On conversion, ABC Ltd. will save on the interest costs and in return will have
to issue additional shares. In case the EPS of ABC Ltd. increases on conversion, the
convertible debt would be considered as anti-dilutive. However, if the conversion will
decrease the EPS, it would be considered as dilutive.
A contingent share agreement is an agreement to issue shares that is dependent on the
satisfaction of specified conditions.
Example 3
ABC Ltd. has provided share options to its employees under a ESOP scheme. As per the
scheme, the employees have to provide 3 years' services to the company for being eligible
to share options at a discounted price. This is a contingent share agreement.
Contingently issuable ordinary shares are ordinary shares issuable for little or no cash or
other consideration upon the satisfaction of specified conditions in a contingent share
agreement.
Example 4
ABC Ltd. acquires XYZ Ltd.'s business in exchange for ABC Ltd.'s shares. If the share price
falls by more than 25% within 6 months of the business combination, ABC Ltd. will issue
more shares (for free) to XYZ Ltd., as a compensation.
2.5
MEASUREMENT
Measurement can be divided into following categories:
a.
b.
Measurement of basic earnings per share
Measurement of earnings
Measurement of weighted average number of shares
Measurement of diluted earnings per share
Measurement of earnings for diluted EPS
Measurement of number of shares for diluted EPS
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.40
FINANCIAL REPORTING
C. Measurement in case of dilutive potential ordinary shares
d.
e.
Measurement in case of options, warrants and their equivalents
Measurement in case of convertible instruments
f.
Measurement in case of contingently issuable shares
g.
h.
Measurement in case of contracts that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash
Measurement in case of purchased options and written put options
i.
Dealing with retrospective adjustments
2.6
MEASUREMENT OF BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE
2.6.1 Meaning and Formula
1. Meaning
2.
An entity shall calculate basic earnings per share for profit or loss attributable to ordinary
equity holders of the parent entity and, if presented, profit or loss from continuing operations
attributable to those equity holders.
The objective of basic earnings per share information is to provide a measure of the interests
of each ordinary share of a parent entity in the performance of the entity over the reporting
period.
Formula
Basic earnings per share shall be calculated by dividing profit or loss for the period
attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity (the numerator) by the weighted
average number of ordinary (equity) shares outstanding during the period (the denominator).
It can be expressed mathematically as follows:
Profit/Loss attributable to Equity share holders
Weighted average number of Equity shares outstanding during the period
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.41
2.6.2 Measurement of Earnings
For the purpose of calculating basic earnings per share, the amounts attributable to ordinary
equity holders of the parent entity in respect of:
(a) profit or loss from continuing operations attributable to the parent entity; and
(b) profit or loss attributable to the parent entity
shall be the amounts in (a) and (b) adjusted for the after-tax amounts of preference dividend,
differences arising on the settlement of preference shares, and other similar effects of
preference shares classified as equity.
An entity that has preference shares in issue, will classify those shares as financial liabilities
or equity in accordance with the principles under Ind AS 32. An adjustment is required to the
profit or loss for the period, to arrive at the profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders
for the purpose of calculating EPS, if preference shares are classified as equity. Any
dividends and other appropriations would be debited directly to equity under Ind AS 32. Any
dividends or other appropriations for preference shares classified as liabilities should be
accounted for as finance costs in arriving at profit or loss for the period. No adjustment is
required for the purpose of calculating EPS.
Where any item of income or expense, which is otherwise required to be recognised in profit
or loss in accordance with Ind AS, is debited or credited to securities premium account/other
reserves, the amount in respect thereof shall be deducted from profit or loss from continuing
operations for the purpose of calculating basic earnings per share.
All items of income and expense attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity
that are recognised in a period, including tax expense and dividends on preference shares
classified as liabilities are included in the determination of profit or loss for the period
attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity.
The amount of dividends declared in respect of the year should be deducted in arriving at the
profit attributable to ordinary shareholders for preference dividends that are non-cumulative.
The dividend for the period should be taken into account, whether or not it has been declared
for cumulative preference dividends. If an entity is unable to pay or declare a cumulative
preference dividend, the undeclared amount of the cumulative preference dividend (net of
tax, if applicable) should still be deducted in arriving at earnings for the purpose of the EPS
calculation. The amount paid is not deducted in arriving at earnings for the purpose of the
EPS calculation in the period in which arrears of cumulative preference dividends are paid.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.42
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Preference shares that provide for a low initial dividend to compensate an entity for selling
the preference shares at a discount, or an above-market dividend in later periods to
compensate investors for purchasing preference shares at a premium, are sometimes
referred to as increasing rate preference shares. Any original issue discount or premium on
increasing rate preference shares is amortised to retained earnings using the effective
interest method and treated as a preference dividend for the purposes of calculating earnings
per share (irrespective of whether such discount or premium is debited or credited to
securities premium account in view of requirements of any law).
Example 1 Increasing rate preference shares
Reference: Ind AS 33, paragraphs 12 and 15
Entity D issued non-convertible, non-redeemable class A cumulative preference shares of Rs.
100 par value on 1 January 20X1. The class A preference shares are entitled to a cumulative
annual dividend of Rs. 7 per share starting in 20X4.
At the time of issue, the market rate dividend yield on the class A preference shares was 7 per
cent a year. Thus, Entity D could have expected to receive proceeds of approximately Rs. 100
per class A preference share if the dividend rate of Rs. 7 per share had been in effect at the
date of issue.
In consideration of the dividend payment terms, however, the class A preference shares were
issued at Rs. 81.63 per share, ie at a discount of Rs. 18.37 per share. The issue price can be
calculated by taking the present value of Rs. 100, discounted at 7 per cent over a three-year
period.
Because the shares are classified as equity, the original issue discount is amortised to retained
earnings using the effective interest method and treated as a preference dividend for earnings
per share purposes. To calculate basic earnings per share, the following imputed dividend per
class A preference share is deducted to determine the profit or loss attributable to ordinary
equity holders of the parent entity:
(a) at 7%
(b) This is before dividend payment.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.43
2.6.2.1 Redemption/Repurchase of preference shares at premium
Preference shares may be repurchased under an entity's tender offer to the holders. The excess of
the fair value of the consideration paid to the preference shareholders over the carrying amount of
the preference shares represents a return to the holders of the preference shares and a charge to
retained earnings for the entity. This amount is deducted in calculating profit or loss attributable to
ordinary equity holders of the parent entity.
Example 5
ABC Ltd. had issued preference shares at
100 each 10 years ago. Now ABC Ltd. buys back the
shares for 120 each. 20 premium for each share is charged to retained earnings. No amount is
recorded in the statement of profit and loss for this transaction. However, for EPS purposes, 20 for
each share is charged to the statement of profit or loss for the period of the transaction.
2.6.2.2 Early conversion of Preference shares at premium
Early conversion of convertible preference shares may be induced by an entity through favourable
changes to the original conversion terms or the payment of additional consideration. The excess of
the fair value of the ordinary shares or other consideration paid over the fair value of the ordinary
shares issuable under the original conversion terms is a return to the preference shareholders and
is deducted in calculating profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity.
Illustration 1
ABC Ltd. issues 9% preference shares of fair value of  10 each on 1.4.20X1. Total value of the
issue is  10,00,000. The shares are issued for a period of 5 years and would be redeemed at
the end of 5th year. The shares are to be redeemed at 11 each.
At the end of the year 3, i.e. on 31.3.20X4, company finds that it has earned good returns than
expected over last three years and can make the redemption of preference shares early. To
compensate the shareholders for two years of dividend which they need to forego, company
decided to redeem the shares at 12 each instead of original agreement of 11. Comment on
the impact of early conversion of preference shares at a premium on earnings for the year 20X3-
20X4 attributable to ordinary equity holders of ABC Ltd. for basic EPS.
Ignore the applicability of the standards on Financial Instruments (i.e., ignore EIR; further, the
additional payment to be made can be met from Securities Premium/Reserves as Premium on
Redemption) and answer on the basis of Ind AS 33 only.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.44
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
In the given situation, 1 per share is the excess payment made by the company amounting to
1,00,000 in all. The amount of  1,00,000 will be deducted from the earnings of the year
20X3-20X4 while calculating the basic EPS of year 20X3-20X4.
*****
2.6.2.3 Excess payment to Preference share holders
Any excess of the carrying amount of preference shares over the fair value of the consideration paid
to settle them is added in calculating profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent
entity.
Illustration 2
An entity has following preference shares in issue at the end of 20X4:
5% redeemable, non-cumulative preference shares: These shares are classified as
liabilities. During the year, an amount of ₹1,00,000 (computed using the coupon rate of 5%
$-\ne20,00,000\times5\%)$ was paid to the preference shareholders
Increasing-rate, cumulative, non-redeemable preference shares issued at a discount in
20X0, with a cumulative dividend rate from 20X5 of 10%: The shares were issued at a
discount to compensate the holders, because dividend payments will not commence until 20X5.
The accrual for the discount in the current year, calculated using the effective interest method
amounted to, say, 18,000. These shares are classified as equity – 200,000.
8% non-redeemable, non-cumulative preference shares: At the beginning of the year, the
entity had 100,000 8% preference shares outstanding but, at 30 June 20X4, it repurchased
 50,000 of these at a discount of ₹1,000  ₹50,000.
7% cumulative, convertible preference shares (converted in the year): These shares
were classified as equity, until their conversion into ordinary shares at the beginning of the
year. No dividend was accrued in respect of the year, although the previous year's dividend
was paid immediately prior to conversion. To induce conversion, the terms of conversion of
the 7% convertible preference shares were also amended, and the revised terms entitled the
preference shareholders to an additional 100 ordinary shares on conversion with a fair value
of 300- Nil.
The profit after tax for the year 20X4 is  150,000.
Determine the adjustments for the purpose of calculating EPS.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.45
Solution
Adjustments for the purpose of calculating EPS are made as follows:
Notes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The original discount on issue of the increasing-rate preference shares is treated as
amortised to retained earnings and treated as preference dividends for EPS purposes and
adjusted against profit attributable to the ordinary equity holders. There is no adjustment
in respect of dividend, because these do not commence until 20X5. Instead, the finance
cost is represented by the amortisation of the discount in the dividend-free period. In future
years, the accrual for the dividend of 20,000 will be deducted from profits.
The discount on repurchase of the 8% preference shares has been credited to equity so
should be added to profit.
The dividend on the 5% preference shares has been charged to the income statement,
because the preference shares are treated as liabilities, so no adjustment is required for it
from the profit.
No accrual for the dividend on the 8% preference shares is required, because they are non-
cumulative. If a dividend had been declared for the year, it would have been deducted from
profit for the purpose of calculating basic EPS, because the shares are treated as equity
and the dividend would have been charged to equity in the financial statements.
The 7% preference shares are convertible and hence correctly classified as equity.
Accordingly, the additional amount paid (100 additional shares x fair value 300 per share
$=\mathbb{F}30,000)$ to induce conversion would be taken to Equity Share Capital and Retained
Earnings or Securities Premium, as the case may be (transaction with 'owners'). Therefore,
this excess amount paid would require to be deducted from the Net Profit to arrive at Net
Profit attributable to Equity Shareholders.
It may be noted that as per Sections 53 and 55 of the Companies Act, 2013, a company
cannot issue shares at discount or any irredeemable preference shares. However, the above
illustration has been given only to explain the concept given in Ind AS.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.46
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The changes given in the above two questions do not consider the impact of the Companies Act,
2013. Since Ind AS is based on IFRS which ignores country-specific statutory requirements and
instead opts for a principle-based approach, solutions are given accordingly. However, the statute
gains precedence over Ind AS, and hence the same needs to be followed practically.
Here, in this paper of Financial Reporting, the discussion has been restricted to the concepts of Ind
AS provisions.
*Treatment of after-tax amount of preference dividend in calculation of Basic EPS
Nature of preference
shares
Other adjustments to Profit or loss attributable to the parent
entity, if any
Non-cumulative
Cumulative
amount
Deduct after-tax
of
Deduct after-tax
amount
of
preference
preference
dividend of the
dividend from
period
from
Profit and Loss,
Profit and Loss
whether or not
only when
dividend
is
declared
declared
In case of an
When
preference
shares are
repurchased
under an
entity's
early
conversion of
preference
shares
When preference shares
are issued at discount or
premium to provide for a
low or high initial dividend
respectively
to
compensate an entity for
selling the preference tender offer
shares at a discount or to
premium (referred as holders
increasing rate preference
shares)
Any original issue discount or premium on increasing rate
preference shares is amortised to retained earnings using the
effective interest method and treated as a preference dividend
Return to the preference
shareholders (charge to retained
earnings) deducted in
calculating profit or loss
attributable to ordinary equity
holders of the parent entity
fair value of the
consideration
paid to the
preference
shareholders
Return to the preference shareholders
(charge to retained earnings) deducted in
calculating profit or loss attributable to
ordinary equity holders of the parent entity
the
carrying amount
of the preference
shares
Fair value of the
ordinary shares or
other consideration
paid at the time of
conversion
convertible
Fair value of the ordinary
shares issuable under
the original conversion
terms
Note: The amount of preference dividends for the period does not include the amount of any preference
dividends for cumulative preference shares paid or declared during the current period in respect of
previous periods.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.47
2.6.3 Shares
2.6.3.1 Weighted Average Number of Shares
For the purpose of calculating basic earnings per share, the number of ordinary shares shall
be the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period.
The weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period is the number
of ordinary shares outstanding at the beginning of the period, adjusted by the number of
ordinary shares bought back or issued during the period multiplied by a time-weighting factor.
The time-weighting factor is the number of days that the shares are outstanding as a
proportion of the total number of days in the period; a reasonable approximation of the
weighted average is adequate in many circumstances.
Weighted average number of equity shares:
*to be multiplied by time-weighting factor. The time-weighting factor is the number of days
that the shares are outstanding as a proportion of the total number of days in the period.
Illustration 3
Following is the data for company XYZ in respect of number of equity shares during the financial
year 20X1-20X2. Find out the number of shares for the purpose of calculation of basic EPS as
per Ind AS 33.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.48
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
The closing balance of the outstanding shares is 2,05,000 by a normal addition and subtraction. But
as per weighted average concept, one need to find out for how many days each type of shares was
actually held during the year.
The shares which were there on 1st April 20X1, were held for the whole year. Therefore, weighted
average number of such shares will be given by the formula:
No of shares x no of days the shares were held during the year / 365
$=1,00,000\times365/365=1,00,000$
But the shares which were issued on $15^{th}$ June 20X1, were held for only 290 days. Therefore, the
weighted average number of shares will be $75,000\times290/365=59,589.$
Following the above formula, the weighted average number of shares for calculation of EPS for the
year 20X1-20X2 will be as follows:
* These shares had already been considered in the shares issued. The same has been deducted
assuming that the bought back shares have been extinguished immediately.
*****
From the above illustration, one can notice that the date of issue/ conversion/ repurchase/
transaction affecting the addition or deletion in number of shares is very crucial for calculation of
weighted average number of shares.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
2.6.3.2 Deciding the date for issue of shares
8.49
Shares are usually included in the weighted average number of shares from the date
consideration is receivable (which is generally the date of their issue), for example:
(a)
ordinary shares issued in exchange for cash are included from the date when cash
is receivable;
(b)
ordinary shares issued on the voluntary reinvestment of dividend on ordinary or
preference shares are included from the date when dividend are reinvested;
(c)
ordinary shares issued as a result of the conversion of a debt instrument to ordinary
shares are included from the date that interest ceases to accrue;
(d)
ordinary shares issued in place of interest or principal on other financial instruments
are included from the date that interest ceases to accrue;
(e)
ordinary shares issued in exchange for the settlement of a liability of the entity are
included from the settlement date;
(f)
ordinary shares issued as consideration for the acquisition of an asset other than
cash are included from the date on which the acquisition is recognised; and
(g)
ordinary shares issued for the rendering of services to the entity are included from
the date on which as the services are rendered.
Ordinary shares issued as part of the consideration transferred in a business combination are
included in the weighted average number of shares from the acquisition date of the business.
This is because the acquirer incorporates into its statement of profit and loss the acquiree's
profits and losses from that date.
Entities often issue instruments that are convertible into ordinary shares that may be either
mandatorily convertible or convertible at the option of the issuer or holder. The issue of
ordinary shares is solely dependent on the passage of time for a mandatorily convertible
instrument. Ordinary shares that are issuable on the conversion of a mandatorily convertible
instrument should be included in basic EPS from the date the contract is entered into.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.50
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Deciding the date for issue of shares
Shares are usually included in the weighted average number of shares from the date
consideration is receivable (which is generally the date of their issue), for example:
Situation of issuance
of ordinary shares
Ordinary shares are included in
the weighted average number
of shares from the date
When issued in exchange
for cash
When issued on voluntary
reinvestment of dividends (on
ordinary or preference shares)
When issued as a result of
conversion of a debt
instrument to ordinary shares
Issued in place of interest or
principal on other financial
instruments
Issued in exchange for the
settlement of a liability
Issued as consideration for
the acquisition of an asset
other than cash
Issued for rendering of
services to the entity
Issued as a part of the
consideration transferred in
a business combination
Issued upon the conversion
of a mandatorily convertible
instrument
When cash is receivable
When dividends are
reinvested
When Interest ceases to
accrue
When Interest ceases to
accrue
On settlement date
When the acquired asset is
recognised
When the services are
rendered
From the date of acquisition
From the date of entering
into the contract
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
2.6.3.3 Contingently issuable shares
8.51
Contingently issuable shares are treated as outstanding and are included in the calculation
of basic earnings per share only from the date when all necessary conditions are satisfied
(i.e. the events have occurred).
Shares that are issuable solely after the passage of time are not contingently issuable shares,
because the passage of time is a certainty.
Outstanding ordinary shares that are contingently returnable (ie subject to recall) are not
treated as outstanding and are excluded from the calculation of basic earnings per share until
the date the shares are no longer subject to recall.
Example 6
ABC Ltd. acquires a company in 20X1 for consideration paid in shares. If the profits for
calendar years 20X1 and 20X2 meet budget, ABC Ltd. will issue more shares to the
vendor in February 20X3. These additional shares will be included in the weighted-
average calculation from 1 January 20X3 (considering reporting date as December end),
if the targets are met.
2.6.3.4 Change in the number of shares without change in value of capital
The weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period and for all
periods presented shall be adjusted for events, other than the conversion of potential ordinary
shares, that have changed the number of ordinary shares outstanding without a
corresponding change in resources.
There are certain events, which will not change the total equity of the company. Still the
number of outstanding equity shares will undergo a change.
Ordinary shares may be issued, or the number of ordinary shares outstanding may be
reduced, without a corresponding change in resources. Examples include:
(a)
a capitalisation or bonus issue (sometimes referred to as a stock dividend);
(b)
a bonus element in any other issue, for example a bonus element in a rights issue to
existing shareholders;
(c)
a share split; and
(d)
a reverse share split (consolidation of shares).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.52
FINANCIAL REPORTING
In a capitalisation or bonus issue or a share split, ordinary shares are issued to existing
shareholders for no additional consideration. Therefore, the number of ordinary shares
outstanding is increased without an increase in resources. The number of ordinary shares
outstanding before the event is adjusted for the proportionate change in the number of
ordinary shares outstanding as if the event had occurred at the beginning of the earliest
period presented.
Example 7
On a two-for-one bonus issue, the number of ordinary shares outstanding before the issue
is multiplied by three to obtain the new total number of ordinary shares, or by two to obtain
the number of additional ordinary shares.
We have seen above that for calculation of weighted average number of shares, the date of
issue/contract etc. is very important. However, in case of bonus shares where the number of
shares change without the change in the resources, the date will be considered from the
beginning of the earliest period presented, irrespective of the fact of the date of actual
capitalisation of the reserves.
Illustration 4
On 31 March, 20X2, the issued share capital of a company consisted of ₹100,000,000 in
ordinary shares of 25 each and ₹500,000 in 10% cumulative non-redeemable preference
shares (classified as equity) of Re 1 each. On 1 October, 20X2, the company issued
1,000,000 ordinary shares fully paid by way of capitalisation of reserves in the proportion
1:4 for the year ended 31 March, 20X3.
Profit for 20X1-20X2 and 20X2-20X3 is ₹450,000 and 550,000 respectively.
Calculate the basic EPS for 20X1-20X2 and 20X2-20X3.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.53
*The comparative EPS for 20X1-20X2 can alternatively be calculated by adjusting the
previously disclosed EPS in 20X1-20X2 (in this example, 10 Paise) by the following factor:
Number of shares before the bonus issue/ Number of shares after the bonus issue
*Adjusted EPS for 20X1-20X2
$10~Paise\times(4,000/5,000)=8~Pais~\epsilon$
Illustration 5
*****
X Ltd.
Calculate the number of shares which would be used in the basic EPS calculation. Consider
reporting date as December end.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
8.54
2.6.3.5 Rights issues
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Entities might raise additional capital by issuing shares to existing shareholders, on a pro rata basis
to their existing holdings, in the form of a rights issue. The rights shares can either be offered at the
current market price or at a price that is below the current market price. Ordinary shares might be
issued during the year by way of a rights issue at a discount to the market price. The weighting
calculation should reflect the fact that the discount is effectively a bonus (stock dividend) given to
the shareholders in the form of shares for no consideration. This bonus element should be factored
into the calculation of the weighted average number of shares. A rights issue is equivalent to a
capitalisation issue of part of the shares for no consideration and an issue of the remainder of the
shares at full market price. The notional capitalisation issue reflects the bonus element inherent in
the rights issue and is measured by the following fraction:
where,
Fair value per share immediately before the excersice of rights
Theoretical ex-rights fair value per share
Theoretical ex-rights fair value per share
Fair value of all outstanding shares before exercise of right + Total amount received from exercise
of rights
No of shares outstanding after the exercise of rights
Illustration 6
At 31 December 20X1, the issued share capital of a company consisted of 1.8 million ordinary
shares of 10 each, fully paid. The profits for the year ended 31 December 20X1 and 20X2
amounted to 630,000 and 875,000 respectively. On 31 March 20X2, the company made a
rights issue on a 1 for 4 basis at 30. The market price of the shares immediately before the
rights issue was  60.
Calculate EPS.
Solution
Calculation of theoretical ex rights price:
Theoretical ex rights price $=270/5=^{2}54$
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.55
Calculation of bonus element
The bonus element of the rights issue is given by the fraction:
Market price before rights issue/Theoretical ex-rights price $=60/54=10/9$
This corresponds to a bonus issue of 1 for 9. The bonus ratio will usually be greater than 1 (that is,
the market price of the shares immediately prior to the exercise of rights is greater than the
theoretical ex-rights price). If the ratio is less than 1, it might indicate that the market price has fallen
significantly during the rights period, which was not anticipated when the rights issue was
announced. In this situation, the rights issue should be treated as an issue of shares for cash at full
market price.
It can be demonstrated, using the figures in the illustration, that a rights issue of 1 for 4 at 30 is
equivalent to a bonus issue of 1 for 9 combined with an issue of shares at full market price of 54
per share. Consider an individual shareholder holding 180 shares:
The additional 450 thousand rights shares at ₹30 can be shown to be equivalent to a bonus issue
of 1 for 9 on the original holding, followed by an issue of 1:8 at full market price of  54 following the
bonus issue, as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.56
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The shareholder is therefore indifferent as to whether the entity makes a rights issue of 1 for 4 at
 30 per share, or a combination of a bonus issue of 1 for 9 followed by a rights issue of 1 for 8
at full market price of 54 per share.
Having calculated the bonus ratio, the ratio should be applied to adjust the number of shares in
issue before the rights issue, both for the current year and for the previous year. Therefore, the
weighted average number of shares in issue for the current and the previous period, adjusted for
the bonus element, would be:
Weighted average number of shares:
In practice, the restated EPS for 20X1 can also be calculated by adjusting the EPS figure of the
previous year by the reciprocal of the bonus element factor:
$*35p\times9/10=31.50~p$
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.57
A consolidation of ordinary shares generally reduces the number of ordinary shares outstanding
without a corresponding reduction in resources. However, when the overall effect is a share
repurchase at fair value, the reduction in the number of ordinary shares outstanding is the result of
a corresponding reduction in resources.
An example is a share consolidation combined with a special dividend. The weighted average
number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period in which the combined transaction takes
place is adjusted for the reduction in the number of ordinary shares from the date the special
dividend is recognised.
Change in the weighted average number of shares (increase or reduction)
without a corresponding change in value of capital
A bonus element in
Capitalisation or
A share split
A
reverse
bonus issue
any other issue, for
share
split
example a bonus
(consolidation
element in a rights
issue to existing
of shares)
The number of ordinary shares outstanding
is increased without an increase in
resources ie without any additional
consideration
shareholders
It reduces the number of
ordinary
shares
outstanding without a
corresponding reduction
in resources
The date in that case will be considered from
the beginning of the earliest period presented
When the overall effect is a share
repurchase at fair value, the reduction
in the number of ordinary shares
outstanding is the result of a
corresponding reduction in resources
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.58
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.7 DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE
2.7.1 Scope, meaning and formula
An entity shall calculate diluted earnings per share amounts for profit or loss attributable to
ordinary equity holders of the parent entity and, if presented, profit or loss from continuing
operations attributable to those equity holders.
For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, an entity shall adjust profit or loss
attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity, and the weighted average number
of shares outstanding, for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The objective of diluted earnings per share is consistent with that of basic earnings per
share-to provide a measure of the interest of each ordinary share in the performance of an
entity-while giving effect to all dilutive potential ordinary shares outstanding during the
period. As a result:
>
profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity is increased by
the after-tax amount of dividend and interest recognised in the period in respect of the
dilutive potential ordinary shares and is adjusted for any other changes in income or
expense that would result from the conversion of the dilutive potential ordinary shares;
and
the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding is increased by the
weighted average number of additional ordinary shares that would have been
outstanding assuming the conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The formula can be mathematically expressed as follows:
Profit/Loss attributable to Equity share holders when dilutive potential shares are converted into ordinary shares
Weighted average number of Equity shares + Weighted average number of dilutive potential ordinary shares
2.7.2 Earnings
For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, an entity shall adjust profit or loss
attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity, by the after-tax effect of:
(a)
(b)
any dividend or other items related to dilutive potential ordinary shares is deducted in
arriving at profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity;
any interest recognised in the period related to dilutive potential ordinary shares; and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.59
(c)
any other changes in income or expense that would result from the conversion of the
dilutive potential ordinary shares.
After the potential ordinary shares are converted into ordinary shares, the new ordinary
shares are entitled to participate in profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the
parent entity. Therefore, profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent
entity is adjusted for the items in (a)-(c) above and any related taxes. The expenses
associated with potential ordinary shares include transaction costs and discounts accounted
for in accordance with the effective interest method under Ind AS 109.
Illustration 7
Entity A has in issue 25,000 4% debentures with a nominal value of
1. The debentures are
convertible to ordinary shares at a rate of 1:1 at any time until 20X9. The entity's management
receives a bonus based on 1% of profit before tax.
Entity A's results for 20X2 showed a profit before tax of ₹80,000 and a profit after tax of
64,000 (for simplicity, a tax rate of 20% is assumed in this question).
Calculate Earnings for the purpose of diluted EPS.
Solution
For the purpose of calculating diluted EPS, the earnings should be adjusted for the reduction in the
interest charge that would occur if the debentures were converted, and for the increase in the
management bonus payment that would arise from the increased profit.
Note: For simplicity, this illustration does not classify the components of the convertible debenture
as liabilities and equity, as required by Ind AS 32.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
8.60
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.7.3 Shares
2.7.3.1 Base for calculation
For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, the number of ordinary shares shall be
the weighted average number of ordinary shares plus the weighted average number of ordinary
shares that would be issued on the conversion of all the dilutive potential ordinary shares into
ordinary shares. Dilutive potential ordinary shares shall be deemed to have been converted into
ordinary shares at the beginning of the period or, if later, the date of the issue of the potential ordinary
shares.
2.7.3.2 Calculation of Weighted average to be done independently for every period
Dilutive potential ordinary shares shall be determined independently for each period
presented. The number of dilutive potential ordinary shares included in the year-to-date
period is not a weighted average of the dilutive potential ordinary shares included in each
interim computation.
Potential ordinary shares are weighted for the period they are outstanding. Potential ordinary
shares that are cancelled or allowed to lapse during the period are included in the calculation
of diluted earnings per share only for the portion of the period during which they are
outstanding. Potential ordinary shares that are converted into ordinary shares during the
period are included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share from the beginning of the
period to the date of conversion; from the date of conversion, the resulting ordinary shares
are included in both basic and diluted earnings per share.
All potential ordinary shares are assumed converted into ordinary shares at the beginning of
the period or, if not in existence at the beginning of the period, at the date of issue of the
potential ordinary shares. The date of issue is the date the financial instrument was issued
or the granting of the rights by which they are generated. This is sometimes referred to as
the 'if converted' method.
The conversion into ordinary shares should be determined from the terms of the financial
instrument or the rights granted. This determination should assume the most advantageous
conversion rate or exercise price from the standpoint of the holder of the potential ordinary
shares.
Only potential ordinary shares that are dilutive are considered in the calculation of diluted
EPS. Potential ordinary shares should be treated as dilutive only when their conversion to
ordinary shares would decrease profit per share or increase loss per share from continuing
operations attributable to ordinary equity holders.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.61
The effects of anti-dilutive potential ordinary shares are ignored in calculating diluted EPS.
An entity might have a number of different types of potential ordinary shares in issue. Each
one would need to be considered separately rather than in aggregate.
Convertible preference shares are dilutive where the amount of dividend on such shares,
declared or accrued in the period per ordinary share obtainable on conversion, is below basic
EPS for continuing operations. If the amount exceeds basic EPS, the convertible preference
shares are anti-dilutive.
Illustration 8
ABC Ltd. has 1,000,000  1 ordinary shares and 1,000  100 10% convertible bonds (issued at
par), each convertible into 20 ordinary shares on demand, all of which have been in issue for the
whole of the reporting period.
ABC Ltd.'s share price is 4.50 per share and earnings for the period are ₹500,000. The tax rate
applicable to the entity is 21%.
Calculate basic EPS, earnings per incremental share for the convertible bonds and diluted EPS.
Ignore the requirements of Financial Instruments (Ind AS 109) for the purpose of this question.
Solution
Basic EPS is 0.50 per share (ie 500,000/1,000,000)
The earnings per incremental share for the convertible bonds is calculated as follows:
Earnings effect = No. of bonds x nominal value x interest cost x (1 - applicable tax rate)
$=1,000\times100\times10\%\times(1-0.21)=\boxed{\times}7,900.$
Incremental shares calculation
Assume all bonds are converted to shares, even though this converts 100 worth of bonds into
20 shares worth only 90 and is therefore not economically rational.
This gives $1000\times20=20,000$ additional shares.
Earnings per incremental share $=\mathbb{F}7,900/20,000=\mathbb{\times}0.395$
Diluted EPS
$=(\vec{x}500,000+\overline{x}7,900)/(1,000,000+20,000)$
= 0.498 per share.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.62
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 9
At 30 June 20X1, the issued share capital of an entity consisted of 1,500,000 ordinary shares of
1 each. On 1 October 20X1, the entity issued  1,250,000 of 8% convertible loan stock for cash
at par. Each 100 nominal value of the loan stock may be converted, at any time during the years
ended 20X6 to 20X9, into the number of ordinary shares set out below:
30 June 20X6: 135 ordinary shares;
30 June 20X7: 130 ordinary shares;
30 June 20X8: 125 ordinary shares; and
30 June 20X9: 120 ordinary shares.
If the loan stocks are not converted by 20X9, they would be redeemed at par.
The written equity conversion option is accounted for as a derivative liability and marked to market
through profit or loss. The change in the options' fair value reported in 20X2 and 20X3 amounted
to losses of  2,500 and 2,650 respectively. It is assumed that there are no tax consequences
arising from these losses.
The profit before interest, fair value movements and taxation for the year ended 30 June 20X2
and 20X3 amounted to 825,000 and 895,000 respectively and relate wholly to continuing
operations. The rate of tax for both periods is 33%.
Calculate Basic and Diluted EPS.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.63
Calculation of diluted EPS
Test whether convertibles are dilutive:
The saving in after-tax earnings, resulting from the conversion of 100 nominal of loan stock,
amounts to $\mp100\times8\%\times67\%+\boxed{\times}.36+\boxed{\times}2,650/12,500=\boxed{\times}5.36+\boxed{\times}0.21=\boxed{\times}5.57$.
There will then be 135 extra shares in issue.
Therefore, the incremental EPS is 4 paise (ie.  5.57/135). As this incremental EPS is less than the
basic EPS at the continuing level, it will have the effect of reducing the basic EPS of 35 paise. Hence
the convertibles are dilutive.
Adjusted number of shares
From the conversion terms, it is clear that the maximum number of shares issuable on conversion
of 1,250,000 loan stock after the end of the financial year would be at the rate of 135 shares per
100 nominal (that is, 1,687,500 shares).
Note: Since Effective Interest Rate is not given, splitting of the convertible loan into liability and
equity components as envisaged under Ind AS 109 cannot be done. However, since fair values of
derivatives are given, the same is considered for accounting at FVTPL.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
8.64
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.7.3.3 Shares of subsidiary, joint venture or associate
A subsidiary, joint venture or associate may issue to parties other than the parent or investors with
joint control of, or significant influence over, the investee potential ordinary shares that are
convertible into either ordinary shares of the subsidiary, joint venture or associate, or ordinary shares
of the parent or investors with joint control of, or significant influence (the reporting entity) over, the
investee. If these potential ordinary shares of the subsidiary, joint venture or associate have a
dilutive effect on the basic earnings per share of the reporting entity, they are included in the
calculation of diluted earnings per share.
2.7.3.4 Options, warrants and their equivalents
For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, an entity shall assume the exercise
of dilutive options and warrants of the entity. The assumed proceeds from these instruments
shall be regarded as having been received from the issue of ordinary shares at the average
market price of ordinary shares during the period. The difference between the number of
ordinary shares issued and the number of ordinary shares that would have been issued at
the average market price of ordinary shares during the period shall be treated as an issue of
ordinary shares for no consideration.
Options and warrants are dilutive when they would result in the issue of ordinary shares for
less than the average market price of ordinary shares during the period. The amount of the
dilution is the average market price of ordinary shares during the period minus the issue price.
Therefore, to calculate diluted earnings per share, potential ordinary shares are treated as
consisting of both the following:
(a) a contract to issue a certain number of the ordinary shares at their average market
price during the period. Such ordinary shares are assumed to be fairly priced and to
be neither dilutive nor antidilutive. They are ignored in the calculation of diluted
earnings per share.
(b)
a contract to issue the remaining ordinary shares for no consideration. Such ordinary
shares generate no proceeds and have no effect on profit or loss attributable to
ordinary shares outstanding. Therefore, such shares are dilutive and are added to the
number of ordinary shares outstanding in the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.65
Treatment of options, warrants and their equivalents
If it is a contract to issue a certain number of
ordinary shares at their average market price
during the period
Shares are assumed to be fairly priced
These shares are neither dilutive nor
antidilutive
If it is a contract to issue remaining
ordinary shares for no consideration
They generate no proceeds and have
no effect on profit or loss
Such shares are dilutive
Ignore in the calculation of diluted earnings per
share
Add to the number of ordinary shares
outstanding in the calculation of
Diluted EPS
Examples 8-10
8. ABC Ltd. has issued 20 lacs shares. It has also issued 1 lac warrants convertible into
shares at 45 per share. The average market price of shares during the current period was
 45.
9.
Such shares are assumed to be fairly priced, and to be neither dilutive, nor anti-dilutive.
They are ignored in the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
ABC Ltd. has issued 20 lacs shares. It has also issued 1 lac warrants convertible into
shares at 30 per share. The average market price of shares during the current period was
37.7 (i.e.  37-30) is the dilution per share of the warrants.
Such shares generate no proceeds and have no effect on profit attributable to the ordinary
shares outstanding. They are dilutive and are added to the number of shares outstanding
in the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
10. In 20X1, ABC Ltd. issued some staff share options that can be exercised after 3 years'
service. They are treated as outstanding on the grant date in 20X1 for diluted earnings per
share purposes.
Illustration 10
At 31 December 20X7 and 20X8, the issued share capital of an entity consisted of 4,000,000
ordinary shares of 25 each. The entity has granted options that give holders the right to
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.66
FINANCIAL REPORTING
subscribe for ordinary shares between 20Y6 and 20Y9 at 70 per share. Options outstanding at
31 December 20X7 and 20X8 were 630,000. There were no grants, exercises or lapses of options
during the year. The profit after tax, attributable to ordinary equity holders for the years ended 31
December 20X7 and 20X8, amounted to ₹500,000 and ₹600,000 respectively (wholly relating to
continuing operations).
Average market price of share:
Year ended 31 December $20\times7=\mp120$
Year ended 31 December $20\times8=\mp160$
Calculate basic and diluted EPS.
Solution
Note: If options had been granted or exercised during the period, the number of 'nil
shares in respect of these options would be included in the diluted EPS calculation on a weighted
average basis for the period prior to exercise.
consideration'
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.67
Options and warrants have a dilutive effect only when the average market price of
ordinary shares during the period exceeds the exercise price of the options or warrants
(i.e. they are 'in the money'). Previously reported earnings per share are not retroactively
adjusted to reflect changes in prices of ordinary shares.
For share options and other share-based payment arrangements to which Ind AS 102, Share-
based Payment, applies, the issue price and the exercise price shall include the fair value
(measured in accordance with Ind AS 102) of any goods or services to be supplied to the
entity in the future under the share option or other share-based payment arrangement.
2.7.3.5 Employee Stock Options
Employee share options with fixed or determinable terms and non-vested ordinary shares are treated
as options in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, even though they may be contingent on
vesting. They are treated as outstanding on the grant date. Performance-based employee share
options are treated as contingently issuable shares because their issue is contingent upon satisfying
specified conditions in addition to the passage of time.
Solution
Calculation of earnings per share
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.68
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Note: Earnings have not increased because the total number of shares has increased only by the
number of shares (25,000) deemed to have been issued for no consideration.
2.7.3.6 Convertible instruments
*****
The dilutive effect of convertible instruments shall be reflected in diluted earnings per share.
Convertible preference shares are antidilutive whenever the amount of the dividend on such
shares declared in or accumulated for the current period per ordinary share obtainable on
conversion exceeds basic earnings per share. Similarly, convertible debt is antidilutive
whenever its interest (net of tax and other changes in income or expense) per ordinary share
obtainable on conversion exceeds basic earnings per share.
The redemption or induced conversion of convertible preference shares may affect only a
portion of the previously outstanding convertible preference shares. In such cases, any
excess consideration is attributed to those shares that are redeemed or converted for the
purpose of determining whether the remaining outstanding preference shares are dilutive.
The shares redeemed or converted are considered separately from those shares that are not
redeemed or converted.
2.7.3.7 Contingently issuable shares
As in the calculation of basic earnings per share, contingently issuable ordinary shares are
treated as outstanding and included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share if the
conditions are satisfied (i.e. the events have occurred). Contingently issuable shares are
included from the beginning of the period (or from the date of the contingent share agreement,
if later). If the conditions are not satisfied, the number of contingently issuable shares
included in the diluted earnings per share calculation is based on the number of shares that
would be issuable if the end of the period were the end of the contingency period.
Restatement is not permitted if the conditions are not met when the contingency period
expires.
If attainment or maintenance of a specified amount of earnings for a period is the condition
for contingent issue and if that amount has been attained at the end of the reporting period
but must be maintained beyond the end of the reporting period for an additional period, then
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.69
the additional ordinary shares are treated as outstanding, if the effect is dilutive, when
calculating diluted earnings per share. In that case, the calculation of diluted earnings per
share is based on the number of ordinary shares that would be issued if the amount of
earnings at the end of the reporting period were the amount of earnings at the end of the
contingency period. Because earnings may change in a future period, the calculation of basic
earnings per share does not include such contingently issuable ordinary shares until the end
of the contingency period because not all necessary conditions have been satisfied.
The number of ordinary shares contingently issuable may depend on the future market price
of the ordinary shares. In that case, if the effect is dilutive, the calculation of diluted earnings
per share is based on the number of ordinary shares that would be issued if the market price
at the end of the reporting period were the market price at the end of the contingency period.
If the condition is based on an average of market prices over a period of time that extends
beyond the end of the reporting period, the average for the period of time that has lapsed is
used. Because the market price may change in a future period, the calculation of basic
earnings per share does not include such contingently issuable ordinary shares until the end
of the contingency period because not all necessary conditions have been satisfied.
The number of ordinary shares contingently issuable may depend on future earnings and
future prices of the ordinary shares. In such cases, the number of ordinary shares included
in the diluted earnings per share calculation is based on both conditions (ie earnings to date
and the current market price at the end of the reporting period). Contingently issuable ordinary
shares are not included in the diluted earnings per share calculation unless both conditions
are met.
In other cases, the number of ordinary shares contingently issuable depends on a condition
other than earnings or market price (for example, the opening of a specific number of retail
stores). In such cases, assuming that the present status of the condition remains unchanged
until the end of the contingency period, the contingently issuable ordinary shares are included
in the calculation of diluted earnings per share according to the status at the end of the
reporting period.
Contingently issuable potential ordinary shares (other than those covered by a contingent
share agreement, such as contingently issuable convertible instruments) are included in the
calculation of diluted earnings per share as follows:
An entity determines whether the potential ordinary shares may be assumed to be
issuable on the basis of the conditions specified for their issue in accordance with the
contingent ordinary share provisions; and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.70
FINANCIAL REPORTING
if those potential ordinary shares are to be reflected in diluted earnings per share, an
entity determines their impact on the calculation of diluted earnings per share by
following the provisions for options and warrants, the provisions for convertible
instruments, the provisions for contracts that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash,
or other provisions, as appropriate.
However, exercise or conversion is not assumed for the purpose of calculating diluted
earnings per share unless exercise or conversion of similar outstanding potential ordinary
shares that are not contingently issuable is assumed.
Illustration 12- Contingently issuable shares
Calculate basic and diluted EPS on quarterly as well as annual basis.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.71
6 5,000 shares x 2/3
7
5,000 shares + (5,000 shares x 1/3)
8
9
$(5,000~shares\times^{8/_{12})+(5,000~shares\times4/_{12}).$
The earnings contingency has no effect on basic earnings per share because it is not certain that the
condition is satisfied until the end of the contingency period. Profits for the year are determined /
finalized on after Q4 / year is completed, i.e. in the year 20X2. Thus, the earliest when these shares
can be actually issued is on 1 Jan 20X2.
10
11
12
Company A does not have year-to-date profit exceeding 2,000,000 at 31 March 20X1. The Standard
does not permit projecting future earnings levels and including the related contingent shares.
Each quarter is treated as an independent reporting period and hence if the conditions are fulfilled
during the quarter, the contingent shares are considered for Diluted EPS right from the beginning of
the reporting period i.e., the quarter in the said case. $[(\mathbb{r}2,300,000-\mathbb{r}2,000,000)\div1,000]\times1,000$
shares = 300,000 shares.
Year-to-date profit is less than 2,000,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.72
FINANCIAL REPORTING
13
14
$[(\vec{r}2,900,000-\vec{r}2,000,000)\div1,000]\times1,000~shares=900,000~s$ shares.
Because the loss during the third quarter is attributable to a loss from a discontinued operation, the
antidilution rules do not apply. The control number (ie profit or loss from, continuing operations
attributable to the equity holders of the parent entity) is positive. Accordingly, the effect of potential
ordinary shares is included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
*****
2.7.3.8 Entity with discontinued operations
An entity that reports a discontinued operation should use income from continuing operations,
adjusted for preferred dividends and similar adjustments, if any, as the  control number" in
determining whether potential common shares are dilutive. That is, the same number of potential
common shares used in computing the diluted per-share amount of income from continuing
operations should be used in computing all other reported diluted per-share amounts even if the
effect will be anti-dilutive compared to their respective basic per-share amounts.
Illustration 13
(a)
(b)
You are required to calculate the basic and diluted EPS for Company XY from the above
information.
Assume, if in above case, Loss from continued operations is  10,00,000 and income from
discontinued operations is 36,00,000 calculate the diluted EPS.
Solution:
(a) Step 1:
Basic EPS
= Profit for the year / Weighted average Number of
shares outstanding
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(b)
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
Basic Loss per share (Discontinued =
operations)
Overall Basic Loss per share
Step 2: Calculation of Diluted EPS
Diluted EPS
EPS (Continued Operations)
Loss per share (Discontinued
operations)
Overall Diluted Loss per share
8.73
Loss from discontinued operations / Weighted
average Number of shares outstanding
$=\overline{\pi}(36,00,000)/10,00,000=(\overline{x}\cdot3.60)$
$=(\vec{r}6,00,000)/10,00,000=\overline{r}(0.60)$
(i)
= Profit for the year / Adjusted Weighted average
Number of shares outstanding
= Profit from continued operations / Adjusted
Weighted average Number of shares
outstanding
=
30,00,000/ 12,00,000 = 2.50
= Loss from discontinued operations / Adjusted
weighted average number of shares
outstanding
$=\overline{x}(36,00,000)/12,00,000=(\overline{x}3.00)$
$=\overline{z}(6,00,000)/12,00,000=\overline{z}(0.50)$
(ii)
The income from continuing operations is the control number, there is a dilution in basic EPS
for income from continuing operations (reduction of EPS from 3.00 to 2.50). Therefore,
even though there is an anti-dilution [Loss per share reduced from  0.60 (i) to  0.50 (ii)
above], diluted loss per share of 0.50 is reported.
In case of loss from continuing operations, the potential shares are excluded since including
those shares would result into anti-dilution effect on the control number (loss from continuing
operations). Therefore, the diluted EPS will be calculated as under:
Diluted EPS
Overall Profit
Weighted average number of shares
outstanding
Diluted EPS
=
Profit for the year / Adjusted Weighted average
Number of shares outstanding
= Loss from continuing operations + Gain from
discontinued operations
$=\mathbb{Z}(10,00,000)+\mathbb{Z}36,00,000=\mathbb{Z}26,00,000$
$=10,00,000$
=
2.60
The dilutive effect of the potential common shares on EPS for income from discontinued
operations and net income would not be reported because of the loss from continuing operations.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.74
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.7.3.9 Contracts that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash
When an entity has issued a contract that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash at the
entity's option, the entity shall presume that the contract will be settled in ordinary shares,
and the resulting potential ordinary shares shall be included in diluted earnings per share if
the effect is dilutive.
When an issued contract that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash at the entity's option
may give rise to an asset or a liability, or a hybrid instrument with both an equity and a liability
component under Ind AS 32, the entity should adjust the numerator (profit or loss attributable
to ordinary equity holders) for any changes in the profit or loss that would have resulted during
the period if the contract had been classified wholly as an equity instrument.
For contracts that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash at the holder's option, the more
dilutive of cash settlement and share settlement shall be used in calculating diluted earnings
per share.
An example of a contract that may be settled in ordinary shares or cash is a debt instrument
that, on maturity, gives the entity the unrestricted right to settle the principal amount in cash
or in its own ordinary shares.
Another example is a written put option that gives the holder a choice of settling in ordinary
shares or cash.
Illustration 14
An entity issues 2,000 convertible bonds at the beginning of Year 1. The bonds have a three-year
term and are issued at par with a face value of  1,000 per bond, giving total proceeds of
2,000,000. Interest is payable annually in arrears at a nominal annual interest rate of 6 per
cent. Each bond is convertible at any time up to maturity into 250 ordinary shares. The entity has
an option to settle the principal amount of the convertible bonds in ordinary shares or in cash.
When the bonds are issued, the prevailing market interest rate for similar debt without a
conversion option is 9 per cent. At the issue date, the market price of one ordinary share is 3.
Income tax is ignored. Entity has accounted for the convertible instrument using the principles of
Financial Instruments.
Interest @ 6% for the year has already been adjusted in the profit attributable to shareholders.
Calculate basic and diluted EPS when
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.75
Assumption: Entity intends to settle only interest in cash
The liability and equity components would be determined in accordance with Ind AS 32. These
amounts are recognised as the initial carrying amounts of the liability and equity components. The
amount assigned to the issuer conversion option equity element is an addition to equity and is not
adjusted.
Basic earnings per share Year 1:
$\frac{\vec{7}1,000,000}{1,200,000}=\vec{7}0.83$ per ordinary share
Diluted earnings per share Year 1:
It is presumed that the issuer will settle the contract by the issue of ordinary shares. The dilutive
effect is therefore calculated in accordance with the Standard.
$\frac{71,000,000+727,338}{1,200,000+500,000}=\overline{7}0.60$ per ordinary share
Notes:
1.
2.
This represents the present value of the interest discounted at 9% -  120,000 payable
annually in arrears for three years. 2,000,000 assumed to be settled in equity since option
is with the entity will not form part of liability.
Profit is adjusted for the accretion of 27,338 (₹303,755 x 9%) of the liability because of the passage
of time.
3. 500,000 ordinary shares $=250$ ordinary shares x 2,000 convertible bonds.
2.7.3.10 Purchased options
*****
Contracts such as purchased put options and purchased call options (ie options held by the
entity on its own ordinary shares) are not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per
share because including them would be antidilutive. The put option would be exercised only
if the exercise price were higher than the market price and the call option would be exercised
only if the exercise price were lower than the market price.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.76
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.7.3.11 Written put options
Contracts that require the entity to repurchase its own shares, such as written put options
and forward purchase contracts, are reflected in the calculation of diluted earnings per share
if the effect is dilutive. If these contracts are 'in the money' during the period (ie the exercise
or settlement price is above the average market price for that period), the potential dilutive
effect on earnings per share shall be calculated as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
it shall be assumed that at the beginning of the period sufficient ordinary shares will
be issued (at the average market price during the period) to raise proceeds to satisfy
the contract;
it shall be assumed that the proceeds from the issue are used to satisfy the contract
(ie to buy back ordinary shares); and
the incremental ordinary shares (the difference between the number of ordinary shares
assumed issued and the number of ordinary shares received from satisfying the
contract) shall be included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
Written put options
Example 11
Assume that an entity has 160 written put options outstanding on 160 of its ordinary shares,
1,600. The
with an exercise price of 10 per option. The put obligation is therefore
average market price of the entity's ordinary shares is 8 for the period. In calculating
diluted EPS, the entity assumes that it issues 200 ordinary shares at 8 per share to raise
the proceeds necessary to satisfy the put option. The difference between the 200 ordinary
shares assumed to be issued and the 160 ordinary shares that would have been received
on exercise of the option (that is, 40 shares) is added to the denominator (number of
shares) in calculating the diluted EPS. No adjustments are made to the numerator (profit
attributable to ordinary shareholders), because the shares are deemed issued for nil
proceeds.
2.8 RETROSPECTIVE ADJUSTMENTS
Diluted EPS of any prior period presented should not be restated for changes in the
assumptions used (such as for contingently issuable shares) or for the conversion of potential
ordinary shares (such as convertible debt) outstanding at the end of the previous period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.77
These factors are already taken into account in calculating the basic and, where applicable,
the diluted EPS for the current period. Prior period's EPS data should be restated for the
effects of errors and adjustments resulting from changes to accounting policies accounted for
retrospectively.
Basic and diluted EPS figures for the current period and for prior periods should include bonus
issues, share splits, share consolidations and other similar events occurring during the period
that change the number of shares in issue without a corresponding change in the resources
of the entity (that is, retrospective application).
2.9
PRESENTATION
An entity shall present in the statement of profit and loss basic and diluted earnings per share
for profit or loss from continuing operations attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the
parent entity and for profit or loss attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the parent
entity for the period for each class of ordinary shares that has a different right to share in
profit for the period. An entity shall present basic and diluted earnings per share with equal
prominence for all periods presented.
Earnings per share is presented for every period for which a statement of profit and loss is
presented. If diluted earnings per share is reported for at least one period, it shall be reported
for all periods presented, even if it equals basic earnings per share. If basic and diluted
earnings per share are equal, dual presentation can be accomplished in one line in the
statement of profit and loss.
If a company does not have any potential ordinary shares, then the company's basic and
diluted EPS will be same. In such a case, the company need not disclose Basic EPS and
Diluted EPS separately. It may disclose basic and diluted EPS as follows (illustrative
numbers only):
An entity that reports a discontinued operation shall disclose the basic and diluted amounts
per share for the discontinued operation either in the statement of profit and loss or in the
notes.
An entity shall present basic and diluted earnings per share, even if the amounts are negative (ie a
loss per share).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.78
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.10 DISCLOSURE
An entity shall disclose the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The amounts used as the numerators in calculating basic and diluted earnings per
share, and a reconciliation of those amounts to profit or loss attributable to the parent
entity for the period. The reconciliation shall include the individual effect of each class
of instruments that affects earnings per share.
the weighted average number of ordinary shares used as the denominator in
calculating basic and diluted earnings per share, and a reconciliation of these
denominators to each other. The reconciliation shall include the individual effect of
each class of instruments that affects earnings per share.
instruments (including contingently issuable shares) that could potentially dilute basic
earnings per share in the future but were not included in the calculation of diluted
earnings per share because they are antidilutive for the period(s) presented.
a description of ordinary share transactions or potential ordinary share transactions
(other than those arising from capitalisation, bonus issue, share split or reverse share
split), that occur after the reporting period and that would have changed significantly
the number of ordinary shares or potential ordinary shares outstanding at the end of
the period if those transactions had occurred before the end of the reporting period.
Examples of transactions in this para include:
(a)
an issue of shares for cash;
(b)
an issue of shares when the proceeds are used to repay debt or preference shares
outstanding at the end of the reporting period;
(c)
the redemption of ordinary shares outstanding;
(d)
the conversion or exercise of potential ordinary shares outstanding at the end of the
reporting period into ordinary shares;
(e)
an issue of options, warrants, or convertible instruments; and
(f)
the achievement of conditions that would result in the issue of contingently issuable
shares. Earnings per share amounts are not adjusted for such transactions occurring
after the reporting period because such transactions do not affect the amount of capital
used to produce profit or loss for the period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.79
Financial instruments and other contracts generating potential ordinary shares may
incorporate terms and conditions that affect the measurement of basic and diluted earnings
per share. These terms and conditions may determine whether any potential ordinary shares
are dilutive and, if so, the effect on the weighted average number of shares outstanding and
any consequent adjustments to profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders. The
disclosure of the terms and conditions of such financial instruments and other contracts is
encouraged, if not otherwise required.
If an entity discloses, in addition to basic and diluted earnings per share, amounts per share
using a reported component of the statement of profit and loss other than one required by
this Standard, such amounts shall be calculated using the weighted average number of
ordinary shares determined in accordance with this Standard.
Basic and diluted amounts per share relating to such a component shall be disclosed with
equal prominence and presented in the notes. An entity shall indicate the basis on which the
numerator(s) is (are) determined, including whether amounts per share are before tax or after
tax. If a component of the statement of profit and loss is used that is not reported as a line
item in the statement of profit and loss, a reconciliation shall be provided between the
component used and a line item that is reported in the statement of profit and loss.
2.11 ADDITIONAL TOPICS
2.11.1 Participating equity instruments and two-class ordinary shares
The equity of some entities includes:
(a)
(b)
instruments that participate in dividend with ordinary shares according to a
predetermined formula (for example, two for one) with, at times, an upper limit on the
extent of participation (for example, up to, but not beyond, a specified amount per
share).
a class of ordinary shares with a different dividend rate from that of another class of
ordinary shares but without prior or senior rights.
For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, conversion is assumed for those
instruments that are convertible into ordinary shares if the effect is dilutive. For those
instruments that are not convertible into a class of ordinary shares, profit or loss for the period
is allocated to the different classes of shares and participating equity instruments in
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.80
FINANCIAL REPORTING
accordance with their dividend rights or other rights to participate in undistributed earnings.
To calculate basic and diluted earnings per share:
(a)
(b)
(c)
profit or loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity is adjusted (a
profit reduced and a loss increased) by the amount of dividend declared in the period
for each class of shares and by the contractual amount of dividend (or interest on
participating bonds) that must be paid for the period (for example, unpaid cumulative
dividend).
the remaining profit or loss is allocated to ordinary shares and participating equity
instruments to the extent that each instrument shares in earnings as if all of the profit
or loss for the period had been distributed. The total profit or loss allocated to each
class of equity instrument is determined by adding together the amount allocated for
dividend and the amount allocated for a participation feature.
the total amount of profit or loss allocated to each class of equity instrument is divided
by the number of outstanding instruments to which the earnings are allocated to
determine the earnings per share for the instrument.
For the calculation of diluted earnings per share, all potential ordinary shares assumed to
have been issued are included in outstanding ordinary shares.
Illustration 15
An entity has two classes of shares in issue:
• 5,000 non-convertible preference shares
• 10,000 ordinary shares
The preference shares are entitled to a fixed dividend of 5 per share before any dividends are
paid on the ordinary shares. Ordinary dividends are then paid in which the preference
shareholders do not participate. Each preference share then participates in any additional ordinary
dividend above 2 at a rate of 50% of any additional dividend payable on an ordinary share.
The entity's profit for the year is 100,000, and dividends of 2 per share are declared on the
ordinary shares.
Compute the allocation of earnings for the purpose of calculation of Basic EPS when an entity has
ordinary shares & participating equity instruments that are not convertible into ordinary shares.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.81
The calculation of basic EPS is as follows:
Allocation of undistributed earnings:
Allocation per ordinary share $=A$
Allocation per preference share $=B$ where $B=50\%$ of A
$(A\times10,000)+(50\%\times A\times5,000)=\overline{\times}55,000$
$A=55,000/(10,000+2,500)=\overline{\pi}4.4$
$B=50\%$ of A i.e. $B=\mathbb{X}2.2$
Proof: $(5,000\times\mp7.2)+(10,000\times\mp6.4)=\mp100,000$
*****
Illustration 16
(This illustration does not illustrate the classification of the components of convertible financial
instruments as liabilities and equity or the classification of related interest and dividends as
expenses and equity as required by Ind AS 32).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.82
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Profit for the year
Ordinary shares outstanding
Non-convertible preference shares
 100,000
10,000
6,000
on
Non-cumulative annual dividend
preference shares (before any dividend is paid
on ordinary shares)
 5.50 per share
After ordinary shares have been paid a dividend of 2.10 per share, the preference shares
participate in any additional dividends on a 20:80 ratio with ordinary shares.
Compute the allocation of earnings for the purpose of calculation of Basic EPS when an entity
has ordinary shares & participating equity instruments that are not convertible into ordinary
shares.
Solution
Allocation of undistributed earnings:
Allocation per ordinary share $=A$
Allocation per preference share $=B$ $B=\frac{1}{4}A$
$(A\times10,000)+(^{1/}_{4}\times A\times6,000)=\overline{\pi}46,000$
$A=\mp46,000\div(10,000+1,500)$
A = 4.00
$B=\frac{1}{4}A$
$B=Re.1.00$
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.83
*****
2.11.2 Partly paid shares
Where ordinary shares are issued but not fully paid, they are treated in the calculation of
basic earnings per share as a fraction of an ordinary share to the extent that they were entitled
to participate in dividend during the period relative to a fully paid ordinary share.
To the extent that partly paid shares are not entitled to participate in dividend during the
period they are treated as the equivalent of warrants or options in the calculation of diluted
earnings per share. The unpaid balance is assumed to represent proceeds used to purchase
ordinary shares. The number of shares included in diluted earnings per share is the
difference between the number of shares subscribed and the number of shares assumed to
be purchased.
Illustration 17
An entity issues 100,000 ordinary shares of  1 each for a consideration of  2.50 per share. Cash
of 1.75 per share was received by the balance sheet date. The partly paid shares are entitled
to participate in dividends for the period in proportion to the amount paid.
Calculate number of shares for calculation of Basic EPS.
Solution
The number of ordinary share equivalents that would be included in the basic EPS calculation on
a weighted basis is as follows:
$(100,000\times\overline{<}1.75)/\overline{\times}2.50=70,000$ shares.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
8.84
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.12 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITIES
Extracts from Annual reports of Hindustan Unilever Ltd.
(All amounts in crores, unless otherwise stated)
NOTE 35 EARNINGS PER EQUITY SHARE
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing the net profit for the period attributable to the equity shareholders of
the Company by the weighted average number of equity shares outstanding during the period. The weighted average
number of equity shares outstanding during the period and for all periods presented is adjusted for events, such as bonus
shares, other than the conversion of potential equity shares that have changed the number of equity shares outstanding,
without a corresponding change in resources.
For the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share, the net profit for the period attributable to equity shareholders
and the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period is adjusted for the effects of all dilutive
potential equity shares.
* Pertains to ESOP shares vested during the year, no outstanding share options as at 31st March, 2022
(Source: Annual Report for 2021-2022 of Hindustan Unilever Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.85
Larsen and Toubro Ltd. (Extract of Statement of Profit and Loss)
Statement of Profit and Loss for the year ended March 31, 2022 (contd.)
NOTE [49]
Basic and diluted Earnings per Share [EPS] computed in accordance with Ind AS 33 "Earnings per Share":
(Source: Annual Report for 2021-2022 of Larsen and Toubro Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.86
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Reliance Industries Ltd. (Statement of Profit and Loss)
Statement of Profit and Loss
For the year ended 31st March, 2022
See accompanying
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.87
* Dilutive impact of Employee Stock Option Scheme and Partly paid Rights Issue Shares
Refer Note 14.9
(Source: Annual Report for 2021-2022 of Reliance Industries Ltd.)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.88
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.13 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN IND AS 33 AND
AS 20
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.89
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
Questions
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1.
ABC Ltd
1 January 20X1
Shares in issue 1,000,000
31 March 20X1
(a)
Rights issue 1 for 5 at 90 paise
(
b)
Fair value of shares 1 (cum-rights price)
Calculate the number of shares for use in the EPS calculation for the calendar year.
2.
1 January
Shares in issue
5% Convertible bonds
1,000,000
 100,000
(terms of conversion 120 ordinary shares for 100)
31 March Holders of 25,000 bonds converted to ordinary shares.
Profit for the year ended 31 December
Tax rate 30%.
200,000
Calculate basic and diluted EPS. Ignore the need to split the convertible bonds into liability
and equity elements.
3.
1 January
Shares in issue
1,000,000
Profit for the year ended 31 December
 100,000
Average fair value during period
₹8
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.90
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The company has in issue 200,000 options to purchase equal ordinary shares
Exercise price
 6
Calculate the diluted EPS for the period.
4.
Calculate Basic EPS for period ending 20X0, 20X1 and 20X2, when
5.
Calculate Subsidiary's and Group's Basic EPS and Diluted EPS, when
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.91
Answers
1. Rights issue bonus fraction
2.
Theoretical ex-rights price $(5.9/6)=0.9833$
Bonus fraction = Cum-rights price / Theoretical ex-rights price
$=1/0.9833$
Number of shares
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.92
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3. Diluted EPS
Working Notes:
4.
Calculation of theoretical ex-rights value per share
Fair value of all outstanding shares before the exercise of rights + total amount received
from exercise of rights
Number of shares outstanding before exercise + number of shares issued in the exercise
$(\vec{r}11.00\times500~shares)+(\vec{r}5.00\times100~shares)$
500 shares + 100 shares
Theoretical ex-rights value per share = 10.00
Calculation of adjustment factor
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 33
8.93
Calculation of basic earnings per share
5.
Subsidiary's earnings per share
Notes:
(a)
Subsidiary's profit attributable to ordinary equity holders.
(b)
Dividends paid by subsidiary on convertible preference shares.
(c)
Subsidiary's ordinary shares outstanding.
Incremental shares from warrants, calculated: $[(\mathbb{r}20-\mathbb{r}10)\div\mathbb{r}20]\times150$.
(d)
(e)
Subsidiary's profit attributable to ordinary equity holders (5,000) increased by  400
preference dividends for the purpose of calculating diluted earnings per share.
(f)
Subsidiary's ordinary shares assumed outstanding from conversion of convertible
preference shares, calculated: 400 convertible preference shares  conversion factor of 1.
Consolidated earnings per share
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.94
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Portion of subsidiary's profit to be included in consolidated basic earnings per share,
calculated: $(800\times\mp5.00)+(300\times Re~1.00).$
Parent's ordinary shares outstanding.
(a)
Parent's profit attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent entity.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Parent's proportionate interest in subsidiary's earnings attributable to ordinary shares,
calculated: $(800\div1,000)\times(1,000~shares\times\mp3.66$ per share).
Parent's proportionate interest in subsidiary's earnings attributable to warrants,
calculated: (30  150)  (75 incremental shares × 3.66 per share).
Parent's proportionate interest in subsidiary's earnings attributable to convertible
preference shares, calculated: $(300\div400)\times(400$ shares from conversion × 3.66
per share).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
