INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.133
UNIT 4 :
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36: IMPAIRMENT
OF ASSETS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to
☐
☐
☐
☐
Comprehend the objective and scope of this standard
Define the terms impairment loss, cash-generating unit, corporate assets,
recoverable amount etc.
Examine the criteria for identifying an asset that may be impaired
Measure the Recoverable Amount
☐ Recognise and Measure the Impairment loss
☐
☐
☐
☐
Identify and examine the Cash Generating Unit of the entity and impair the
Goodwill
Allocate and Reverse the Impairment loss
Disclose the facts as per the requirement of the standard
Differentiate between Ind AS 36 and AS 28.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.134
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT OVERVIEW
Reversal of Impairment
losses
Recognition
and
measurement of
an
Impairment loss
Objective
are
 ensuring that assets
carried at no more than their
recoverable amount.
• when an impairment loss
should be reversed
Scope:
Applies to all asset except
arising from Ind AS 2, 12, 19,
41, 104, 105, 109 and 115
Requirement for impairment
review when there are
inidcations for impairment
Measurement of recoverable
amount:
Higher of fair value less costs of
diposal and its value in use
Requirement for annual review
Intangible assets with an indefinite
useful life or not yet available for
use.
Goodwill acquired in business
combination
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.135
4.1 OBJECTIVE
The objective of this Standard is to prescribes the methodology that an entity applies to ensure that
its assets are not carried at more than their recoverable amount (i.e. the higher of fair value less
costs of disposal and value in use). With the exception of goodwill and certain intangible assets for
which an annual impairment test is required.
An asset is carried at more than its recoverable amount if its carrying amount exceeds the amount
to be recovered through use or sale of the asset. In such case, the asset is described as impaired
and the Standard requires the entity to recognise an impairment loss.
The Standard also specifies when an entity shall reverse an impairment loss and prescribes
disclosures.
4.2 SCOPE
This Standard shall be applied in accounting for the impairment of all assets, other than:
Inventories (as covered in Ind AS 2)
Contract assets and assets arising from costs to obtain or fulfill a contract (Ind AS
115)
Deferred tax assets (Ind AS 12)
Assets arising from employees benefits (Ind AS 19)
Biological Assets measured at fair value less cost to sell (Ind AS 41)
Contract that are assets and any assets for insurance acquisition, Cash Flows (Ind
AS 117)
Non-current assets (or disposal groups) classified as held for sale (as covered in
Ind AS 105)
Financial Assets (within the scope of Ind AS 109)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.136
FINANCIAL REPORTING
All of the items excluded from the scope of Ind AS 36 are covered by other Ind AS which
contain requirements that are equivalent to impairment assessments in some form. For
example, Ind AS 2 requires inventories to be measured after initial recognition 'at the lower
of cost and net realisable value'. It is therefore unnecessary to test inventories for further
impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36 as the recoverability of these assets has already
been determined through the subsequent measurement requirements of Ind AS 2.
This Standard applies to financial assets classified as:
Subsidiaries, as defined
in Ind AS 110,
Consolidated Financial
Statements
Associates, as defined in
Ind AS 28 Investments in
Associates and Joint
Ventures
Joint ventures, as defined
in Ind AS 111, Joint
Arrangements
Impairment of other financial assets shall be accounted as per Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments.
4.3 RELEVANT DEFINITIONS
The following are the key terms used in this standard:
1.
Carrying amount is the amount at which an asset is recognised after deducting any
accumulated depreciation (amortisation) and accumulated impairment losses thereon.
2.
A cash-generating unit is the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash
inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of
assets.
3.
Corporate assets are assets other than goodwill that contribute to the future cash flows of
both the cash-generating unit under review and other cash-generating units.
4.
Costs of disposal are incremental costs directly attributable to the disposal of an asset or
cash-generating unit, excluding finance costs and income tax expense.
5.
Depreciable amount is the cost of an asset, or other amount substituted for cost in the
financial statements, less its residual value.
6.
Depreciation (Amortisation) is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an
asset over its useful life.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.137
7.
8.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability
in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (refer
Ind AS 113 Fair Value Measurement).
An impairment loss is the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset or a cash-
generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount.
9.
Carrying
Amount
Recoverable
Amount
Impairment
Loss
The recoverable amount of an asset or a cash-generating unit is the higher of its fair value
less costs of disposal and its value in use.
10.
Useful life is either:
a)
the period of time over which an asset is expected to be used by the entity; or
b)
11.
the number of production or similar units expected to be obtained from the asset by
the entity.
Value in use is the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from an
asset or cash-generating unit.
4.4 IDENTIFYING AN ASSET THAT MAY BE IMPAIRED
4.4.1 Identifying an asset that may be impaired - General
An asset is impaired when its carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
Carrying
Amount
Recoverable
Amount
Impairment Loss
An entity shall assess at the end of each reporting period whether there is any indication
that an asset may be impaired. If any such indication exists, the entity is required to estimate
the recoverable amount of the asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.138
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Irrespective of whether there is any indication of impairment, an entity is required to test
following items for impairment at least annually:
Intangible asset with an
indefinite useful life
Intangible asset not yet
available for use
Test goodwill acquired in
a business combination
for impairment annually
For above three assets, the entity should not have wait for Impairment indicators, rather there is
mandate of impairment testing. We will discuss this aspect in detail in the next section.
4.4.2 Indications of impairment
In assessing whether there is any indication that an asset may be impaired, an entity shall consider,
as a minimum, the following indications:
4.4.2.1 External source of Information
The following are external source of information which may indicate that an asset is impaired:
a) during the period, an asset's market value has declined significantly more than would
b)
c)
be expected as a result of the passage of time or normal use;
significant changes with an adverse effect on the entity have taken place during the period,
or will take place in the near future, in the technological, market, economic or legal
environment in which the entity operates or in the market to which an asset is dedicated;
market interest rates or other market rates of return on investments have increased during
the period, and those increases are likely to affect the discount rate used in calculating an
asset's value in use and decrease the asset's recoverable amount materially; and
d) the carrying amount of the net assets of the entity is more than its market capitalisation.
4.4.2.2 Internal source of Information
The following are internal source of information which may indicate that an asset is impaired:
a) evidence is available of obsolescence or physical damage of an asset;
b)
significant changes with an adverse effect on the entity have taken place during the period
or are expected to take place in the near future, in the extent to which, or manner in which,
an asset is used or is expected to be used. These changes include the asset becoming
idle, plans to discontinue or restructure the operation to which an asset belongs, plans to
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.139
c)
dispose of an asset before the previously expected date, and reassessing the useful life of
an asset as finite rather than indefinite;
evidence is available from internal reporting that indicates that the economic performance
of an asset is, or will be, worse than expected. Such evidence may include:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
cash flows for acquiring the asset, or subsequent cash needs for operating or
maintaining it, that are significantly higher than those originally budgeted;
actual net cash flows or operating profit or loss flowing from the asset that are
significantly worse than those budgeted;
a significant decline in budgeted net cash flows or operating profit, or a significant
increase in budgeted loss, flowing from the asset; or
operating losses or net cash outflows for the asset, when current period amounts
are aggregated with budgeted amounts for the future.
4.4.2.3 Dividend from a subsidiary, jointly controlled entity or associate
For an investment in a subsidiary, jointly controlled entity or associate, the investor recognises a
dividend from the investment and evidence is available that:
(i)
(ii)
the carrying amount of the investment in the separate financial statements exceeds the
carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements of the investee's net assets,
including associated goodwill; or
the dividend exceeds the total comprehensive income of the subsidiary, jointly controlled
entity or associate in the period the dividend is declared.
The above list is not exhaustive. An entity may identify other indications that an asset may be
impaired and these would also require the entity to determine the asset's recoverable amount or, in
the case of goodwill, perform an impairment test.
If market interest rates or other market rates of return on investments have increased during the
period, an entity is not required to make a formal estimate of an asset's recoverable amount in the
following cases:
a) if the discount rate used in calculating the asset's value in use is unlikely to be affected by
the increase in these market rates. For example, increases in short-term interest rates may
not have a material effect on the discount rate used for an asset that has a long remaining
useful life; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.140
FINANCIAL REPORTING
b)
if the discount rate used in calculating the asset's value in use is likely to be affected by
the increase in these market rates but previous sensitivity analysis of recoverable amount
shows that:
(i)
(ii)
it is unlikely that there will be a material decrease in recoverable amount because
future cash flows are also likely to increase (e.g. in some cases, an entity may be
able to demonstrate that it adjusts its revenues to compensate for any increase in
market rates); or
the decrease in recoverable amount is unlikely to result in a material impairment
loss.
External sources of
information
Internal sources of
information
Investment in a subsidiary,
joint venture or associate
Significant decline in
market value (more
than normal decline)
Obsolescence
physical damage of an
asset
or
Significant changes in
technology, market,
economic or legal
environment
with
adverse effect on entity
Significant changes in
use or expected to be
used of an asset with
an adverse effect on
entity
Carrying amount of
investment (in separate
financial statements) >
Carrying amounts of
investee's net assets
(including associated
goodwill) in the
consolidated financial
statements
Increase in market
interest rates or rate of
returns
Carrying amount of net
assets of entity is more
its
than
capitalisation
market
Internal
reporting
worse
indicating
economic performance
of asset than expected
Dividend
>
Comprehensive
income of investee
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Total
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.141
4.5 REQUIREMENT FOR ANNUAL REVIEW
4.5.1 Items required to be tested for impairment at least annually
Irrespective of whether there is any indication of impairment, an entity is required to test following
items for impairment at least annually:
a) intangible asset with an indefinite useful life;
b)
intangible asset not yet available for use; and
c)
goodwill acquired in a business combination.
4.5.2 Intangible assets required to be tested for impairment at least
annually
Intangible asset with an indefinite useful life and intangible assets not yet available for use to be
tested for impairment
a) annually; and
b) and whenever there is an indication, at the end of a reporting period, that the asset may be
impaired
by comparing its carrying amount with its recoverable amount, irrespective of whether there is any
indication that it may be impaired.
This impairment test may be performed at any time during an annual period, provided it is
performed at the same time every year and whenever there is an indication, at the end of a
reporting period, that the asset may be impaired.
Example 1
Intellectual Property rights (IPR) having Indefinite useful life has been tested for Impairment
in the first quarter of FY 20X1-20X2. Impairment testing on such assets needs to be
mandatory done in the same time frame i.e first quarter of FY 20X2-20X3. Suppose there
is an indication of impairment in third quarter of FY 20X2-20X3, in such case, the company
needs to do impairment testing in third quarter apart from mandatory annual review.
Different intangible assets may be tested for impairment at different times. However, if such
an intangible asset was initially recognised during the current annual period, that intangible
asset shall be tested for impairment before the end of the current annual period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.142
FINANCIAL REPORTING
However, the most recent detailed calculation of such an asset's recoverable amount made
in a preceding period may be used in the impairment test for that asset in the current period,
provided all of the following criteria are met:
a) if the intangible asset does not generate cash inflows from continuing use that are
largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets and is therefore
tested for impairment as part of the cash-generating unit to which it belongs, the
assets and liabilities making up that unit have not changed significantly since the
most recent recoverable amount calculation;
b)
the most recent recoverable amount calculation resulted in an amount that exceeded
the asset's carrying amount by a substantial margin; and
c)
based on an analysis of events that have occurred and circumstances that have
changed since the most recent recoverable amount calculation, the likelihood that a
current recoverable amount determination would be less than the asset's carrying
amount is remote.
4.5.3 Goodwill
4.5.3.1 CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated
A cash-generating unit to which goodwill has been allocated is tested for impairment both:
a)
annually, and
b) whenever there is an indication that the unit may be impaired,
by comparing the carrying amount of the unit, including the goodwill, with the recoverable amount of
the unit. If the recoverable amount of the unit exceeds the carrying amount of the unit, the unit and
the goodwill allocated to that unit shall be regarded as not impaired. If the carrying amount of the
unit exceeds the recoverable amount of the unit, the entity recognises an impairment loss in
accordance with the requirement of this standard.
4.5.3.2 Timing of impairment tests
The annual impairment test for a cash-generating unit to which goodwill has been allocated
may be performed at any time during an annual period, provided the test is performed at the
same time every year. Different cash-generating units may be tested for impairment at
different times.
However, if some or all of the goodwill allocated to a cash-generating unit was acquired in a
business combination during the current annual period, that unit shall be tested for
impairment before the end of the current annual period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.143
4.5.3.3 Individual assets to be tested before CGU to which goodwill has been
allocated
If the assets constituting the CGU to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for
impairment at the same time as the unit containing the goodwill, they shall be tested for
impairment before the unit containing the goodwill.
Similarly, if the CGUs constituting a group of CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated are
tested for impairment at the same time as the group of units containing the goodwill, the
individual units shall be tested for impairment before the group of units containing the
goodwill.
At the time of impairment testing a CGU to which goodwill has been allocated, there may be
an indication of an impairment of an asset within the unit containing the goodwill. In such
circumstances, the entity tests the asset for impairment first, and recognises any impairment
loss for that asset before testing for impairment the cash-generating unit containing the
goodwill.
Similarly, there may be an indication of an impairment of a cash-generating unit within a group
of units containing the goodwill. In such circumstances, the entity tests the cash-generating
unit for impairment first, and recognises any impairment loss for that unit, before testing for
impairment the group of units to which the goodwill is allocated.
4.5.3.4 Rolling forward detailed calculations from a preceding period
The most recent detailed calculation made in a preceding period of the recoverable amount of a
cash-generating unit to which goodwill has been allocated may be used in the impairment test of
that unit in the current period provided all the following criteria are met:
a) the assets and liabilities making up the unit have not changed significantly since the most
recent recoverable amount calculation;
b)
c)
the most recent recoverable amount calculation resulted in an amount that exceeded the
carrying amount of the unit by a substantial margin; and
based on an analysis of events that have occurred and circumstances that have changed
since the most recent recoverable amount calculation, the likelihood that a current
recoverable amount determination would be less than the current carrying amount of the
unit is remote.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.144
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.5.3.5 CGUs to which it has not been possible to allocate goodwill
When goodwill relates to a CGU but has not been allocated to that unit, the unit shall be
tested for impairment, whenever there is an indication that the unit may be impaired, by
comparing the unit's carrying amount, excluding any goodwill, with its recoverable amount.
Any impairment loss is recognised in accordance with the requirement of this standard.
If a CGU as described above includes in its carrying amount an intangible asset that has an
indefinite useful life or is not yet available for use and that asset can be tested for impairment
only as part of the CGU, the unit also to be tested for impairment annually.
4.6 MEASUREMENT OF RECOVERABLE AMOUNT
4.6.1 Recoverable amount
The recoverable amount of an asset or a CGU is the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal
and its value in use.
Higher of
Fair Value less Cost of disposal
Value in use
Illustration 1
The carrying value of a building in the books of Sun Ltd. as at 31st March, 20X1 is  300 lakh. As
on that date the value in use is 250 lakh and fair value less cost of disposal is 238 lakh.
Calculate the Recoverable Amount.
Solution
Recoverable Amount: Higher of Fair Value less Costs of disposal and Value in Use
Fair Value less costs of disposal: 250 lakh
Value in Use: 238 lakh
Therefore, Recoverable value will be 250 lakh
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.145
4.6.2 Circumstances in which it is not necessary to calculate both an
asset's fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use
If either of these amounts exceeds the asset's carrying amount, the asset is not impaired and
it is not necessary to estimate the other amount.
If there is no basis for making a reliable estimate of fair value less costs of disposal,
recoverable amount is measured by reference to value in use alone.
In some cases, estimates, averages and computational short cuts may provide reasonable
approximations of the detailed computations (illustrated in this Standard) for determining fair
value less costs of disposal or value in use.
4.6.3 Circumstances in which recoverable amount is determined in the
context of CGU
Recoverable amount is determined for an individual asset, unless the asset does not generate cash
inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets. If this is the
case, recoverable amount is determined for the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs
(refer paragraphs 65-103), unless either:
a) the asset's fair value less costs of disposal is higher than its carrying amount; or
b)
the asset's value in use can be estimated to be close to its fair value less costs of disposal
and fair value less costs of disposal can be determined.
Some of the indicators are aimed at individual assets rather than the CGU of which they are a part
of. For example, a decline in the value of an asset or evidence that it is obsolete or damaged. Such
indicators may also imply that a wider review of the business or CGU is required. However, this is
not always the case. For example, if there is a slump in property prices and the market value of the
entity's new head office falls below its carrying value this would constitute an indicator of impairment
and trigger a review. At the level of the individual asset, as fair value less cost of disposal is below
carrying amount, this might indicate that a write-down is necessary. However, building's recoverable
amount may have to be considered in the context of a CGU of which it is a part of. This is an
example of a situation where it may not be necessary to re-estimate an asset's recoverable amount
because it may be obvious that the CGU has suffered no impairment. In short, it may be irrelevant
to the recoverable amount of the CGU that it contains a head office whose market value has fallen.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.146
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.7 FAIR VALUE LESS COSTS OF DISPOSAL
4.7.1 Fair value and costs of disposal - definition
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (Ind AS 113 Fair Value
Measurement).
Costs of disposal are incremental costs directly attributable to the disposal of an asset or cash-
generating unit, excluding finance costs and income tax expense.
4.7.2 Cost of disposal to be deducted
Costs of disposal, other than those that have been recognised as liabilities, are deducted in
determining fair value less costs of disposal. Examples of such costs are legal costs, stamp duty
and similar transaction taxes, costs of removing the asset, and direct incremental costs to bring
an asset into condition for its sale.
However, termination benefits (as defined in Ind AS 19) and costs associated with reducing or
reorganising a business following the disposal of an asset are not direct incremental costs to
dispose of the asset.
4.7.3 Contrasting fair value and value in use
Fair value differs from value in use. Fair value reflects the assumptions market participants would
use when pricing the asset. In contrast, value in use reflects the effects of factors that may be
specific to the entity and not applicable to entities in general. For example, fair value does not reflect
any of the following factors to the extent that they would not be generally available to market
participants:
a) additional value derived from the grouping of assets (such as the creation of a portfolio of
investment properties in different locations);
b)
synergies between the asset being measured and other assets;
c) legal rights or legal restrictions that are specific only to the current owner of the asset; and
d)
tax benefits or tax burdens that are specific to the current owner of the asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.147
4.8 VALUE IN USE
4.8.1 Value in use - general
Value in use is the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from an asset
or cash-generating unit.
Primarily two key decisions are involved in determining value in use:
Estimating future
cash flows
Discount rate to be
used
4.8.2 Estimation of expected future cash flows
The following elements shall be reflected in the calculation of an asset's value in use:
a) an estimate of the future cash flows the entity expects to derive from the asset;
expectations about possible variations in the amount or timing of those future cash flows;
the time value of money, represented by the current market risk-free rate of interest;
b)
c)
d)
the price for bearing the uncertainty inherent in the asset; and
e)
other factors, such as illiquidity, that market participants would reflect in pricing the future
cash flows the entity expects to derive from the asset.
Estimating the value in use of an asset involves the following steps:
a)
estimating the future cash inflows and outflows to be derived from continuing use of
the asset and from its ultimate disposal; and
b) applying the appropriate discount rate to those future cash flows.
The elements identified above in point (b), (d) and (e) can be reflected either as adjustments
to the future cash flows or as adjustments to the discount rate. Whichever approach an entity
adopts to reflect expectations about possible variations in the amount or timing of future cash
flows, the result shall be to reflect the expected present value of the future cash flows, i.e.
the weighted average of all possible outcomes.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.148
FINANCIAL REPORTING
When estimating expected future cash flows, the following rules apply:
Reasonable and supportable assumptions of management's best estimates of the
economic conditions over the remaining useful life of the asset.
Greater weight should be given to external evidence
Most recent financial budgets or forecasts that have been approved by
management.
Projections should cover a maximum period of five years, unless a longer period
can be justified.
a) Projections of cash flows shall be based on reasonable and supportable
assumptions that represent management's best estimate of the range of economic
conditions that will exist over the remaining useful life of the asset. Greater weight
shall be given to external evidence.
b)
Management assesses the reasonableness of the assumptions on which its current
cash flow projections are based by examining the causes of differences between past
cash flow projections and actual cash flows. Management shall ensure that the
assumptions on which its current cash flow projections are based are consistent with
past actual outcomes, provided the effects of subsequent events or circumstances that
did not exist when those actual cash flows were generated make this appropriate.
Base cash flow projections on the most recent financial budgets/forecasts approved
by management but shall exclude any estimated future cash inflows or outflows
expected to arise from future restructurings or from improving or enhancing the
asset's performance. Projections based on these budgets/forecasts shall cover a
maximum period of five years, unless a longer period can be justified.
c) Detailed, explicit and reliable financial budgets/forecasts of future cash flows for
periods longer than five years are generally not available. For this reason,
management's estimates of future cash flows are based on the most recent
budgets/forecasts for a maximum of five years. Management may use cash flow
projections based on financial budgets/forecasts over a period longer than five years
if it is confident that these projections are reliable and it can demonstrate its ability,
based on past experience, to forecast cash flows accurately over that longer period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.149
d) Estimate cash flow projections beyond the period covered by the most recent
budgets/forecasts by extrapolating the projections based on the budgets/forecasts
using a steady or declining growth rate for subsequent years, unless an increasing
rate can be justified. This growth rate shall not exceed the long-term average growth
rate for the products, industries, or country or countries in which the entity operates,
or for the market in which the asset is used, unless a higher rate can be justified.
e)
f)
g)
Period beyond the budgets / forecasts period will be the terminal period. The
terminal value is an estimate of the present value all the cash flows in the terminal
period (as at the end of the forecast period) based on the final cash flow in the
forecast period. For example, assume that an entity has a 5 year forecast period,
the formula to determine the terminal value as at the end of year 5 is:
Terminal value at the end of year $5=$ (Cash flows of $5^{th}$ year x (1+growth rate)) /
(weighted average cost of capital minus growth rate).
Cash flow projections until the end of an asset's useful life are estimated by
extrapolating the cash flow projections based on the financial budgets/forecasts
using a growth rate for subsequent years. This rate is steady or declining, unless
an increase in the rate matches objective information about patterns over a product
or industry lifecycle. If appropriate, the growth rate is zero or negative.
Estimates of future cash flows and the discount rate reflect consistent assumptions
about price increases attributable to general inflation. Therefore, if the discount rate
includes the effect of price increases attributable to general inflation, future cash
flows are estimated in nominal terms. If the discount rate excludes the effect of price
increases attributable to general inflation, future cash flows are estimated in real
terms (but include future specific price increases or decreases).
4.8.2.1 Estimates of future cash flows shall include:
a) projections of cash inflows from the continuing use of the asset;
b)
c)
projections of cash outflows that are necessarily incurred to generate the cash inflows from
continuing use of the asset (including cash outflows to prepare the asset for use) and can
be directly attributed, or allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis, to the asset;
net cash flows, if any, to be received (or paid) for the disposal of the asset at the end of its
useful life. The estimate of net cash flows to be received (or paid) for the disposal of an
asset at the end of its useful life shall be the amount that an entity expects to obtain from
the disposal of the asset in an arm's length transaction between knowledgeable, willing
parties, after deducting the estimated costs of disposal.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.150
FINANCIAL REPORTING
d)
e)
The estimate of net cash flows to be received (or paid) for the disposal of an asset at the
end of its useful life is determined in a similar way to an asset's fair value less costs of
disposal, except that, in estimating those net cash flows:
(i)
(ii)
an entity uses prices prevailing at the date of the estimate for similar assets that
have reached the end of their useful life and have operated under conditions similar
to those in which the asset will be used; and
the entity adjusts those prices for the effect of both future price increases due to
general inflation and specific future price increases or decreases. However, if
estimates of future cash flows from the asset's continuing use and the discount rate
exclude the effect of general inflation, the entity also excludes this effect from the
estimate of net cash flows on disposal;
projections of cash outflows include those for the day-to-day servicing of the asset as well
as future overheads that can be attributed directly, or allocated on a reasonable and
consistent basis, to the use of the asset and
in the same way that corporate assets can be allocated to a CGU's carrying value, the
CGU's cash flows shall also include an appropriate apportionment of corporate overheads
when calculating value in use. However, care should be taken around internal charges for
using the asset.
4.8.2.2 Estimates of future cash flows shall exclude:
Estimates of future cash flows do not include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
cash inflows from assets that generate cash inflows that are largely independent of
the cash inflows from the asset under review (for example, financial assets such as
receivables);
cash outflows that relate to obligations that have been recognised as liabilities (for
example, payables, pensions or provisions);
future cash outflows or related cost savings (for example reductions in staff costs)
or benefits that are expected to arise from a future restructuring to which an entity
is not yet committed.
Ind AS 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets, contains
guidance clarifying when an entity is committed to a restructuring.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.151
(d)
When an entity becomes committed to a restructuring, some assets are likely to be
affected by this restructuring. Once the entity is committed to the restructuring its
estimates of future cash inflows and cash outflows for the purpose of determining
value in use reflect the cost savings and other benefits from the restructuring (based
on the most recent financial budgets/forecasts approved by management) and its
estimates of future cash outflows for the restructuring are included in a restructuring
provision in accordance with Ind AS 37;
estimated future cash flows that are expected to arise from improving or enhancing
the asset's performance, i.e. the general rule is that future cash flows should be
forecasted for CGUs or assets in their current condition.
Estimates of future cash flows do include future cash flows necessary to maintain
the level of economic benefits expected to arise from the asset in its current
condition.
When a cash-generating unit consists of assets with different estimated useful lives,
all of which are essential to the ongoing operation of the unit, the replacement of
assets with shorter lives is considered to be part of the day-to-day servicing of the
unit when estimating the future cash flows associated with the unit. Similarly, when
a single asset consists of components with different estimated useful lives, the
replacement of components with shorter lives is considered to be part of the day-to-
day servicing of the asset when estimating the future cash flows generated by the
asset;
(e) cash inflows or outflows from financing activities. Estimated future cash flows reflect
assumptions that are consistent with the way the discount rate is determined.
Otherwise, the effect of some assumptions will be counted twice or ignored.
(f)
(g)
Because the time value of money is considered by discounting the estimated future
cash flows, these cash flows exclude cash inflows or outflows from financing
activities;
income tax receipts or payments. Because the discount rate is determined on a pre-
tax basis, future cash flows are also estimated on a pre-tax basis; and
when corporate assets have been allocated to a CGU's carrying amount, any internal
charges incurred by the CGU for using such assets shall not be included in the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.152
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 2
CGU's expected future cash flows. To do so would be to double-count the impact
of the corporate assets and could result in an impairment loss being recognised
incorrectly.
Saturn India Ltd is reviewing one of its business segments for impairment. The carrying value of
its net assets is 40 million. Management has produced two computations for the value-in-use of
the business segment. The first value of 36 million excludes the benefit to be derived from a
future reorganization, but the second value of 44 million includes the benefits to be derived from
the future reorganization. There is not an active market for the sale of the business segments.
Advise whether the business segment needs to be impaired.
Solution
The benefit of the future reorganization should not be taken into account in calculating value-in-use.
Therefore, the net assets of the business segment will be impaired by 4 million because the value-
in-use of 36 million is lower than the carrying value of 40 million. The value-in-use can be used
as the recoverable amount as there is no active market for the sale of the business segment.
*****
4.8.2.3 Foreign currency future cash flows
Future cash flows are first estimated in the currency in which they will be generated and then
discounted using a discount rate appropriate for that currency. After that, an entity translates the
present value using the spot exchange rate at the date of the value in use calculation. This is to
avoid the problems inherent in using forward exchange rates, which are based on differential interest
rates. Using such a rate would result in double-counting the time value of money, first in the discount
rate and then in the forward rate.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.153
Value in Use
Sum
Year wise estimated
future cash flows
Includes
Excludes
Applicable discount rate
Projections of
cash
inflows from the
continuing use of the
asset
Projections of cash
outflows,
which
necessarily incurred to
generate
the cash
inflows from continuing
use of the asset and can
be directly attributed to
the asset
Net cash flows, to be
received / paid for the
disposal of the asset at
the end of its useful life
Future restructuring
to which an entity is
not yet committed
It should be a
pre-tax
rate
(rates)
that
reflect(s) current
market
assessments of
Time value of
Improving
enhancing
asset's
or
the
money
performance
Risks specific
to the asset for
Cash inflows or
outflows
which the
from
future
cash
financing activities
flow estimates
have not been
adjusted
Income tax receipts
or payments
When an asset-specific rate is not
directly available from the market, the
entity uses surrogates to estimate the
discount rates.
Entity's
weighted
average cost of capital
4.8.3 Discount rate
Entity's incremental
borrowing rate
Other
market
borrowing rates.
The discount rate (rates) shall be a pre-tax rate (rates) that reflect(s) current market
assessments of:
(a)
the time value of money; and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.154
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
the risks specific to the asset for which the future cash flow estimates have not been
adjusted.
This rate is estimated from the rate implicit in current market transactions for similar assets
or from the weighted average cost of capital of a listed entity that has a single asset (or a
portfolio of assets) similar in terms of service potential and risks to the asset under review.
However, the discount rate(s) used to measure an asset's value in use shall not reflect risks
for which the future cash flow estimates have been adjusted. Otherwise, the effect of some
assumptions will be double counted.
When an asset-specific rate is not directly available from the market, an entity uses
surrogates to estimate the discount rate.
Appendix A also gives the following guidelines for selecting the appropriate discount rate:
it should be adjusted to reflect the specific risks associated with the projected cash flows
(such as country, currency, price and cash flow risks) and to exclude risks that are not
relevant;
to avoid double counting, the discount rate does not reflect risks for which future cash flow
estimates have been adjusted;
the discount rate is independent of the entity's capital structure and the way it financed the
purchase of the asset;
if the basis for the rate is post-tax (such as a weighted average cost of capital), it is adjusted
for the Value in Use (VIU) calculation to reflect a pre-tax rate; and
normally, the entity uses a single discount rate but it should use separate discount rates for
different future periods if the VIU is sensitive to different risks for different periods or to the
term structure of interest rates.
The discount rate specific for the asset or CGU will take account of the period over which the
asset or CGU is expected to generate cash inflows and it may not be sensitive to changes in
short-term rates.
Illustration 3
Mars Ltd. gives the following estimates of cash flows relating to property, plant and equipment
on $31^{st}$ March, 20X4. The discount rate is 15%
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.155
Property, plant & equipment was purchased on 1st April, 20X1 for
20,000 lakh
Useful Life was
8 Years
Residual Value estimated at the end of 8 years
500 lakh
Fair value less cost to disposal
10,000 lakh
Calculate impairment loss, if any on the property, plant and equipment. Also calculate the
revised carrying amount and revised depreciation of property, plant and equipment.
Solution
(a) Calculation of Carrying Amount on 31st March, 20X4
(b) Calculation of Value in Use
(in lakh)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.156
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(c) Calculation of Recoverable Amount
(d)
(e)
(f)
Calculation of Impairment Loss
Carrying Amount - Recoverable Amount
12,687-10,000 $0,000=2,687$
Calculation of Revised Carrying Amount
Calculation of Revised Depreciation
Revised Carrying Amount - Residual Value
Remaining Life
$\frac{10,000-500}{5}=1,900$
*****
4.9 RECOGNISING AND MEASURING AN IMPAIRMENT
LOSS
4.9.1 Recognition and measurement of an impairment loss - Individual
Asset
If, and only if, the recoverable amount of an asset is less than its carrying amount, the carrying
amount of the asset shall be reduced to its recoverable amount. That reduction is an impairment
loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
No
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.157
Impairment loss
Whether asset is carried at revalued
amount?
Recognised immediately in
profit or loss
Yes
No
Whether revaluation
surplus exists?
Yes
Recognised immediately
in profit or loss to the
extent loss exceeds the
revaluation surplus
Recognised in OCI to the extent
that the impairment loss does
not exceed the amount in the
revaluation surplus for that same
asset (Refer Ind AS 16 also)
Note:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Any impairment loss of a revalued asset shall be treated as a revaluation decrease as per
other standard.
When the amount estimated for an impairment loss is greater than the carrying amount of
the asset to which it relates, an entity shall recognise a liability, if required.
After the recognition of an impairment loss, the depreciation (amortisation) charge for the
asset shall be adjusted in future periods to allocate the asset's revised carrying amount, less
its residual value (if any), on a systematic basis over its remaining useful life.
If an impairment loss is recognised, any related deferred tax assets or liabilities are
determined in accordance with Ind AS 12 by comparing the revised carrying amount of the
asset with its tax base.
Illustration 4: Impairment Loss
Jupiter Ltd, a leading manufacturer of steel is having a furnace, which is carried in the balance
sheet on 31st March, 20X1 at 250 lakh. As at that date the value in use and fair value is
200 lakh. The cost of disposal is 13 lakh.
Calculate the impairment loss to be recognised in the books of the company?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.158
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
Calculation of Impairment Loss:
An impairment loss shall be recognised immediately in profit or loss, unless the asset is
carried at revalued amount in accordance with another Standard (for example, in accordance
with the revaluation model in Ind AS 16).
Any impairment loss of a revalued asset shall be treated as a revaluation decrease in
accordance with that other Standard. Impairment loss on a revalued asset is recognised in
other comprehensive income to the extent that the impairment loss does not exceed the
amount in the revaluation surplus for that same asset. Such an impairment loss on a revalued
asset reduces the revaluation surplus for that asset.
When the amount estimated for an impairment loss is greater than the carrying amount of the
asset to which it relates, an entity shall recognise a liability if, and only if, that is required by
another Standard.
After the recognition of an impairment loss, the depreciation (amortisation) charge for the
asset is adjusted in future periods to allocate the asset's revised carrying amount, less its
residual value (if any), on a systematic basis over its remaining useful life.
If an impairment loss is recognised, any related deferred tax assets or liabilities are
determined in accordance with Ind AS 12 by comparing the revised carrying amount of the
asset with its tax base.
Illustration 5
Mercury Ltd. has an identifiable asset with a carrying amount of  1,000. Its recoverable amount
is650. The tax rate is 30% and the tax base of the asset is  800. Impairment losses are not
deductible for tax purposes. Identify the impact of impairment loss on related deferred tax asset
/ liability against the revised carrying amount of asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.159
The effect of impairment loss is as follows:
In accordance with Ind AS 12, the entity recognises the deferred tax asset to the extent that it is
probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary difference can
be utilised.
*****
4.9.2 Recognition and measurement of an impairment loss for a cash-
generating unit and goodwill
4.9.2.1 Identification of cash generating units
A cash-generating unit is the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash
inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
If there is any indication that an asset may be impaired, recoverable amount shall be
estimated for the individual asset. If it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of
the individual asset, an entity is required to determine the recoverable amount of the cash-
generating unit to which the asset belongs (the asset's cash-generating unit).
The recoverable amount of an individual asset cannot be determined if:
(a)
(b)
the asset's value in use cannot be estimated to be close to its fair value less costs
of disposal (for example, when the future cash flows from continuing use of the asset
cannot be estimated to be negligible); and
the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from
other assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.160
FINANCIAL REPORTING
In such cases, value in use and, therefore, recoverable amount, can be determined only for
the asset's cash-generating unit.
If recoverable amount cannot be determined for an individual asset, an entity identifies the
lowest aggregation of assets that generate largely independent cash inflows.
In Practice, CGUs could represent:
Departments or business units within an entity
(a)
An entire entity
(b)
(c)
Production line within a department, or within an entity
(d)
Groups of items of property, plant and equipment within a production line, or within
a department, or within an entity
Examples 2 & 3
2.
3.
A mining entity owns a private railway to support its mining activities. The private railway
could be sold only for scrap value and it does not generate cash inflows that are largely
independent of the cash inflows from the other assets of the mine.
It is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of the private railway because its
value in use cannot be determined and is probably different from scrap value. Therefore,
the entity estimates the recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit to which the private
railway belongs, ie the mine as a whole.
A bus company provides services under contract with a municipality that requires minimum
service on each of five separate routes. Assets devoted to each route and the cash flows
from each route can be identified separately. One of the routes operates at a significant
loss.
Since the entity does not have the option to curtail any one bus route, the lowest level of
identifiable cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets
or groups of assets is the cash inflows generated by the five routes together. The cash-
generating unit for each route is the bus company as a whole.
*****
4.9.2.2 Relevance of internal management reporting to the identification of CGUs
Cash inflows are inflows of cash and cash equivalents received from parties external to the entity.
In identifying whether cash inflows from an asset (or group of assets) are largely independent of the
cash inflows from other assets (or groups of assets), an entity considers various factors including
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.161
how management monitors the entity's operations or how management makes decisions about
continuing or disposing of the entity's assets and operations.
4.9.2.3 Active market exists for the output produced by an asset or group of assets
If an active market exists for the output produced by an asset or group of assets, that asset
or group of assets shall be identified as a cash-generating unit, even if some or all of the
output is used internally.
Even if part or all of the output produced by an asset or a group of assets is used by other
units of the entity, this asset or group of assets forms a separate cash-generating unit if the
entity could sell the output on an active market. This is because the asset or group of assets
could generate cash inflows that would be largely independent of the cash inflows from other
assets or groups of assets.
If the cash inflows generated by any asset or cash-generating unit are affected by internal
transfer pricing, an entity shall use management's best estimate of future price(s) that could
be achieved in arm's length transactions in estimating:
(a)
(b)
the future cash inflows used to determine the asset's or cash-generating unit's value
in use; and
the future cash outflows used to determine the value in use of any other assets or
cash-generating units that are affected by the internal transfer pricing.
4.9.2.4 Cash-generating units to be identified consistently from period to period
Cash-generating units shall be identified consistently from period to period for the same asset
or types of assets, unless a change is justified.
If an entity determines that an asset belongs to a cash-generating unit different from that in
previous periods, or that the types of assets aggregated for the asset's cash-generating unit
have changed, disclosures are required about the cash-generating unit, if an impairment loss
is recognised or reversed for the cash-generating unit.
4.9.2.5 Allocation of assets and liabilities to CGUS
The recoverable amount of a cash-generating unit is the higher of the cash-generating unit's
fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use.
Carrying amount is the amount at which an asset is recognised after deducting any
accumulated depreciation (amortisation) and accumulated impairment losses thereon. The
carrying amount of a cash-generating unit shall be determined on a basis consistent with the
way the recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit is determined.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.162
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The carrying amount of a cash-generating unit:
(a)
(b)
includes the carrying amount of only those assets that can be attributed directly, or
allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis, to the cash-generating unit and will
generate the future cash inflows used in determining the cash-generating unit's
value in use; and
does not include the carrying amount of any recognised liability, unless the
recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit cannot be determined without
consideration of this liability.
This is because fair value less costs of disposal and value in use of a cash-generating unit
are determined excluding cash flows that relate to assets that are not part of the cash-
generating unit and liabilities that have been recognised.
In some cases, although some assets contribute to the estimated future cash flows of a cash-
generating unit, they cannot be allocated to the cash-generating unit on a reasonable and
consistent basis. This might be the case for goodwill or corporate assets such as head office
assets.
It may be necessary to consider some recognised liabilities to determine the recoverable
amount of a cash-generating unit. This may occur if the disposal of a cash-generating unit
would require the buyer to assume the liability. In this case, the fair value less costs of
disposal (or the estimated cash flow from ultimate disposal) of the cash-generating unit is the
estimated selling price for the assets of the cash-generating unit and the liability together,
less the costs of disposal. To perform a meaningful comparison between the carrying amount
of the cash-generating unit and its recoverable amount, the carrying amount of the liability is
deducted in determining both the cash-generating unit's value in use and its carrying amount.
Illustration 6
A company operates a mine in a country where legislation requires that the owner must
restore the site on completion of its mining operations. The cost of restoration includes the
replacement of the overburden, which must be removed before mining operations
commence. A provision for the costs to replace the overburden was recognised as soon
as the overburden was removed. The amount provided was recognised as part of the cost
of the mine and is being depreciated over the mine's useful life. The carrying amount of
the provision for restoration costs is 500, which is equal to the present value of the
restoration costs.
The entity is testing the mine for impairment. The cash-generating unit for the mine is the
mine as a whole. The entity has received various offers to buy the mine at a price of around
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.163
800. This price reflects the fact that the buyer will assume the obligation to restore the
overburden. Disposal costs for the mine are negligible. The value in use of the mine is
approximately 1,200, excluding restoration costs. The carrying amount of the mine is
1,000.
Recommend the impairment loss is to be accounted for.
Solution
The cash-generating unit's fair value less costs of disposal is 800. This amount considers
restoration costs that have already been provided for. As a consequence, the value in use
for the cash-generating unit is determined after consideration of the restoration costs and is
estimated to be 700 ( 1,200 less 500). The carrying amount of the cash-generating unit
is 500, which is the carrying amount of the mine (1,000) less the carrying amount of the
provision for restoration costs ( 500). Therefore, the recoverable amount of the cash-
generating unit exceeds its carrying amount. Thus, there is no impairment loss.
*****
For practical reasons, the recoverable amount of a cash-generating unit is sometimes
determined after consideration of assets that are not part of the cash-generating unit (for
example, receivables or other financial assets) or liabilities that have been recognised (for
example, payables, pensions and other provisions). In such cases, the carrying amount of
the cash-generating unit is increased by the carrying amount of those assets and decreased
by the carrying amount of those liabilities.
4.9.2.6 Allocating goodwill to cash-generating units
Goodwill can only generate cash inflows in combination with other assets which means that
an impairment test cannot be carried out on goodwill alone. For the purpose of impairment
testing, goodwill acquired in a business combination shall, from the acquisition date, be
allocated to each of the acquirer's cash-generating units, or groups of cash-generating units,
that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination, irrespective of whether
other assets or liabilities of the acquiree are assigned to those units or groups of units.
Operating synergies fall into two broad groups, those that improve margin (e.g. through cost
savings and economies of scale) and those that give an opportunity for future growth (e.g.
through the benefits of the combined talent and technology). In all of the following cases, the
acquiring entity can identify the synergies and the CGU or CGU group that benefits from
them. Goodwill will be allocated to the relevant CGU or CGU group.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.164
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Examples 4 - 6
4.
5.
6.
An airline is subject to cost pressures common in the sector. It acquires another
operation with similar international operations on the basis that it can reduce its
workforce and asset base. It will combine its operational management, including its
sales, reporting and human resources functions, into one head office and
consolidate all aircraft maintenance in a single site that currently has capacity.
These cost savings are the synergies of the business combination and goodwill
would therefore be allocated to the CGU or group of CGUs that benefit from these
cost savings.
A mining entity (group) extracts a metal ore that does not have an active market until
it has been through a smelting and refining process. The entity considers the CGU
to comprise the smelter together with the individual mines. When the entity acquires
a mine, the synergies relate to cost savings as the mine's fixed costs are already
covered by the existing refining operations. Goodwill is therefore allocated to the
CGU comprising the smelter, the existing mines and the newly acquired mine.
A global consumer products company, which allocates goodwill at the operating
segment level, purchases a company best-known for razors and razor blades. It has
not previously manufactured razors although its 'grooming products' operating
segment does manufacture other shaving products. The acquirer expects that it will
be able to increase sales of its shaving products through association with the target
company's razors and through branding. No assets of the acquired business are
allocated to the grooming products operating segment but this segment will benefit
from the synergies of the business combination and therefore goodwill from the
acquisition will be allocated to it.
Goodwill sometimes cannot be allocated on a non-arbitrary basis to individual cash-
generating units, but only to groups of cash-generating units. Each unit or group of units to
which the goodwill is so allocated:
(a)
(b)
represent the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for
internal management purposes; and
not be larger than an operating segment as defined by paragraph 5 of Ind AS 108
'Operating Segments' before aggregation.
Goodwill recognised in a business combination is an asset representing the future economic
benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.165
of other assets or groups of assets and, therefore, it will always be tested for impairment as
part of a CGU or a group of CGUs.
If the initial allocation of goodwill acquired in a business combination cannot be completed
before the end of the annual period in which the business combination is effected, that initial
allocation shall be completed before the end of the first annual period beginning after the
acquisition date.
In accordance with Ind AS 103 'Business Combinations', if the initial accounting for a business
combination can be determined only provisionally by the end of the period in which the
combination is effected, the acquirer:
(a)
accounts for the combination using those provisional values; and
(b)
recognises any adjustments to those provisional values as a result of completing the
initial accounting within the measurement period, which will not exceed twelve
months from the acquisition date.
In such circumstances, it might also not be possible to complete the initial allocation of the
goodwill recognised in the combination before the end of the annual period in which the
combination is affected. When this is the case, the entity discloses the information required
by this standard.
If goodwill has been allocated to a cash-generating unit and the entity disposes of an
operation within that unit, the goodwill associated with the operation disposed of shall be:
(a)
(b)
included in the carrying amount of the operation when determining the gain or loss on
disposal; and
measured on the basis of the relative values of the operation disposed of and the
portion of the cash-generating unit retained, unless the entity can demonstrate that
some other method better reflects the goodwill associated with the operation disposed
of.
Example 7
An entity sells for 100 an operation that was part of a cash-generating unit to which
goodwill has been allocated. The goodwill allocated to the unit cannot be identified or
associated with an asset group at a level lower than that unit, except arbitrarily. The
recoverable amount of the portion of the cash-generating unit retained is 300.
Since the goodwill allocated to the cash-generating unit cannot be non-arbitrarily identified
or associated with an asset group at a level lower than that unit, the goodwill associated
with the operation disposed of is measured on the basis of the relative values of the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.166
FINANCIAL REPORTING
operation disposed of and the portion of the unit retained. Therefore, 25 per cent of the
goodwill allocated to the cash-generating unit is included in the carrying amount of the
operation that is sold.
If an entity reorganises its reporting structure in a way that changes the composition of one
or more cash-generating units to which goodwill has been allocated, the goodwill shall be
reallocated to the units affected. This reallocation is performed by using a relative value
approach similar to that used when an entity disposes of an operation within a cash-
generating unit, unless the entity can demonstrate that some other method better reflects the
goodwill associated with the reorganised units.
Example 8
Goodwill had previously been allocated to cash-generating unit A. The goodwill allocated to A
cannot be identified or associated with an asset group at a level lower than A, except arbitrarily.
A is to be divided and integrated into three other cash-generating units, B, C and D.
Since the goodwill allocated to A cannot be non-arbitrarily identified or associated with an asset
group at a level lower than A, it is reallocated to units B, C and D on the basis of the relative
values of the three portions of A before those portions are integrated with B, C and D.
Illustration 7
Entity A acquires Entity B for 50 million, of which
identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
35 million is the fair value of the
The acquisition of B Ltd. is to be
integrated into two of Entity A's CGUs with the net assets being allocated as follows:
In addition to the net assets acquired that are assigned to CGU 2, the acquiring entity
expects CGU 2 to benefit from certain synergies related to the acquisition (e.g. CGU 2 is
expected to realise higher sales of its products because of access to the acquired entity's
distribution channels). There is no synergistic goodwill attributable to other CGUs.
Entity A allocated the purchase consideration of the acquired business to CGU 1 and CGU
2 as 33 million and  17 million respectively.
Determine the allocation of goodwill to each CGU?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.167
Solution:
If goodwill is allocated to the CGUs based on the difference between the purchase
consideration and the fair value of net assets acquired ie direct method, the allocation would
be as follows:
(All figures are in million, unless otherwise specified)
*****
4.9.2.7 Allocating corporate assets to cash-generating units
Corporate assets are assets other than goodwill that contribute to the future cash flows of
both the cash-generating unit under review and other cash-generating units. Corporate
assets include group or divisional assets such as the building of a headquarters or a division
of the entity, EDP equipment or a research centre. The structure of an entity determines
whether an asset meets this Standard's definition of corporate assets for a particular cash-
generating unit.
The distinctive characteristics of corporate assets are that:
(a)
(b)
they do not generate cash inflows independently of other assets or groups of assets;
and
their carrying amount cannot be fully attributed to the cash-generating unit under
review.
Because corporate assets do not generate separate cash inflows, they are tested for
impairment in the context of the CGU or group of CGUs to which the asset belongs. In testing
a cash-generating unit for impairment, an entity shall identify all the corporate assets that
relate to the cash-generating unit under review. If a portion of the carrying amount of a
corporate asset:
(a)
can be allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis to that unit, the entity
compares the carrying amount of the unit, including the portion of the carrying
amount of the corporate asset allocated to the unit, with its recoverable amount. Any
impairment loss is recognised in accordance with the requirement of this standard.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.168
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b) cannot be allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis to that unit, the entity:
(i)
compares the carrying amount of the unit, excluding the corporate asset, with
its recoverable amount and recognise any impairment loss in accordance with
the requirement of this standard;
(ii) identify the smallest group of cash-generating units that includes the cash-
generating unit under review and to which a portion of the carrying amount of
the corporate asset can be allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis;
and
(iii)
Illustration 8
compare the carrying amount of that group of cash-generating units, including
the portion of the carrying amount of the corporate asset allocated to that
group of units, with the recoverable amount of the group of units. Any
impairment loss shall be recognised in accordance with the requirement of
this standard.
Earth Infra Ltd has two cash-generating units, A and B. There is no goodwill within the
units' carrying values. The carrying values of the CGUs are CGU A for 20 million and
CGU B for 30 million. The company has an office building which it is using as an office
headquarter and has not been included in the above values and can be allocated to the
units on the basis of their carrying values. The office building has a carrying value of  10
million. The recoverable amounts are based on value-in-use of  18 million for CGU A and
38 million for CGU B.
Determine whether the carrying values of CGU A and B are impaired.
Solution
The office building is a corporate asset which needs to be allocated to CGU A and B on a
reasonable and consistent basis:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.169
The impairment loss will be allocated on the basis of $4/24$ against the building (1 million)
and $20/24$ against the other assets (
5 million).
*****
Allocating corporate assets to cash-generating units for impairment
Yes
Whether a portion of the carrying
amount of a corporate asset can be
allocated on a reasonable and
consistent basis to that unit?
Yes
Whether CV of the CGU*
> RV of the CGU?
No
* CV includes the portion
of the CV of the corporate
asset allocated to it
Impairment loss is
allocated in the
following order:
No
Step 1:
Compare CV of the CGU* with RV of the
CGU
* CV excludes corporate asset
No impairment
loss
Step 2:
Identify the smallest group of CGU that
includes the CGU under review and to
which a portion of CV of the corporate
asset can be allocated on a reasonable
and consistent basis
Order 1
Reduce the CV of any goodwill allocated to
CGU (group of units)
Order 2
Reduce CV of other assets of the unit
(group of units) pro rata on the basis of the
CV of each asset in the unit (group of units)
Step 3:
Compare CV of that smallest group of
CGU* with RV of group of units
* CV includes the portion of the CV of
the corporate asset allocated to that
smallest group of CGU
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.170
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.9.2.8 Recognition and measurement of an impairment loss for a cash-generating
unit
An impairment loss is recognised for a cash-generating unit (the smallest group of cash-
generating units to which goodwill or a corporate asset has been allocated) if, and only if, the
recoverable amount of the unit (group of units) is less than the carrying amount of the unit
(group of units). The impairment loss is allocated to reduce the carrying amount of the assets
of the unit (group of units) in the following order:
(a)
(b)
first, to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the cash-generating
unit (group of units); and
then, to the other assets of the unit (group of units) pro rata on the basis of the
carrying amount of each asset in the unit (group of units).
In allocating an impairment loss to individual assets within a CGU, the carrying amount of an
individual shall not be reduce below the highest of:
Fair value less
Value in use
zero
costs to sell
The amount of the impairment loss that would otherwise have been allocated to the asset
shall be allocated pro rata to the other assets of the unit (group of units).
If the recoverable amount of an individual asset cannot be determined:
(a)
(b)
Illustration 9
an impairment loss is recognised for the asset if its carrying amount is greater than
the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal and the results of the allocation
procedures described; and
no impairment loss is recognised for the asset if the related cash-generating unit is
not impaired. This applies even if the asset's fair value less costs of disposal is less
than its carrying amount.
A machine has suffered physical damage but is still working, although not as well as before it was
damaged. The machine's fair value less costs of disposal is less than its carrying amount. The
machine does not generate independent cash inflows. The smallest identifiable group of assets
that includes the machine and generates cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.171
inflows from other assets is the production line to which the machine belongs. The recoverable
amount of the production line shows that the production line taken as a whole is not impaired.
Assumption 1: budgets/forecasts approved by management reflect no commitment of
management to replace the machine.
Assumption 2: budgets/forecasts approved by management reflect a commitment of management
to replace the machine and sell it in the near future. Cash flows from continuing use of the
machine until its disposal are estimated to be negligible.
Advise the accounting for the impairment loss of machine in above scenarios.
Solution
1.
2.
The recoverable amount of the machine alone cannot be estimated because the machine's
value in use:
(a)
(b)
may differ from its fair value less costs of disposal; and
can be determined only for the cash-generating unit to which the machine belongs
(the production line).
The production line is not impaired. Therefore, no impairment loss is recognised for the
machine. Nevertheless, the entity may need to reassess the depreciation period or the
depreciation method for the machine. Perhaps a shorter depreciation period or a faster
depreciation method is required to reflect the expected remaining useful life of the machine
or the pattern in which economic benefits are expected to be consumed by the entity.
The machine's value in use can be estimated to be close to its fair value less costs of disposal.
Therefore, the recoverable amount of the machine can be determined and no consideration
is given to the cash-generating unit to which the machine belongs (i.e. the production line).
Because the machine's fair value less costs of disposal is less than its carrying amount, an
impairment loss is recognised for the machine.
After the allocation procedures have been applied, a liability is recognised for any remaining amount
of an impairment loss for a cash-generating unit if, and only if, that is required by another Indian
Accounting Standard.
*****
4.9.3 Two-step approach for goodwill allocated to a group of CGUs
When goodwill is allocated to a group of CGUs for the purpose of impairment testing but cannot be
allocated on a non-arbitrary basis to individual CGUs, the individual CGUs must be tested for
impairment before the group of CGUs containing the associated goodwill.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.172
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.10 REVERSING AN IMPAIRMENT LOSS
4.10.1 Reversals of impairment losses - general
An entity is required to assess at the end of each reporting period whether there is any
indication that an impairment loss recognised in prior periods for an asset other than goodwill
may no longer exist or may have decreased. If any such indication exists, the entity shall
estimate the recoverable amount of that asset.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill shall not be reversed in a subsequent period.
An impairment loss recognised in prior periods for an asset other than goodwill shall be
reversed if, and only if, there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the
asset's recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised. If this is the case,
the carrying amount of the asset is, except as described in paragraph 117, increased to its
recoverable amount.
A reversal of an impairment loss reflects an increase in the estimated service potential of an
asset, either from use or from sale, since the date when an entity last recognised an
impairment loss for that asset. Examples of changes in estimates include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
a change in the basis for recoverable amount (ie whether recoverable amount is
based on fair value less costs of disposal or value in use);
if recoverable amount was based on value in use, a change in the amount or timing
of estimated future cash flows or in the discount rate; or
if recoverable amount was based on fair value less costs of disposal, a change in
estimate of the components of fair value less costs of disposal.
An asset's value in use may become greater than the asset's carrying amount simply because
the present value of future cash inflows increases as they become closer. However, the
service potential of the asset has not increased. Therefore, an impairment loss is not
reversed just because of the passage of time (sometimes called the 'unwinding' of the
discount), even if the recoverable amount of the asset becomes higher than its carrying
amount.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.173
4.10.2 Indications of reversals of impairment loss
In assessing whether there is any indication that an impairment loss recognised in prior periods for
an asset other than goodwill may no longer exist or may have decreased, an entity shall consider,
as a minimum, the following indications:
4.10.2.1 External sources of information
a) there are observable indication that the asset's value has increased significantly during the
period;
b)
c)
significant changes with a favorable effect on the entity have taken place during the period,
or will take place in the near future, in the technological, market, economic or legal
environment in which the entity operates or in the market to which the asset is dedicated;
and
market interest rates or other market rates of return on investments have decreased during
the period, and those decreases are likely to affect the discount rate used in calculating the
asset's value in use and increase the asset's recoverable amount materially.
4.10.2.2 Internal sources of information
(a) significant changes with a favourable effect on the entity have taken place during the period,
or are expected to take place in the near future, in the extent to which, or manner in which,
the asset is used or is expected to be used. These changes include costs incurred during
the period to improve or enhance the asset's performance or restructure the operation to
which the asset belongs; and
(b)
evidence is available from internal reporting that indicates that the economic performance of
the asset is, or will be, better than expected.
If there is an indication that an impairment loss recognised for an asset other than goodwill
may no longer exist or may have decreased, this may indicate that the remaining useful life,
the depreciation (amortisation) method or the residual value may need to be reviewed and
adjusted in accordance with the Indian Accounting Standard applicable to the asset, even if
no impairment loss is reversed for the asset.
4.10.3 Reversing an impairment loss for an individual asset
The increased carrying amount of an asset other than goodwill attributable to a reversal of
an impairment loss shall not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined
(net of amortisation or depreciation) had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in
prior years. Any increase in excess of this amount would be a revaluation and would be
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.174
FINANCIAL REPORTING
accounted for under the appropriate Standard (e.g. Ind AS 16 Property, Plant and
Equipment).
A reversal of an impairment loss for an asset other than goodwill is recognised immediately
in profit or loss, unless the asset is carried at revalued amount in accordance with another
Indian Accounting Standard. Any reversal of an impairment loss of a revalued asset shall be
treated as a revaluation increase in accordance with that other Indian Accounting Standard.
A reversal of an impairment loss on a revalued asset is recognised in other comprehensive
income and increases the revaluation surplus for that asset. However, to the extent that an
impairment loss on the same revalued asset was previously recognised in profit or loss, a
reversal of that impairment loss is also recognised in profit or loss.
After a reversal of an impairment loss is recognised, the depreciation (amortisation) charge
for the asset is adjusted in future periods to allocate the asset's revised carrying amount, less
its residual value (if any), on a systematic basis over its remaining useful life.
4.10.4 Reversing an impairment loss for a cash-generating unit
A reversal of an impairment loss for a cash-generating unit shall be allocated to the assets of
the unit, except for goodwill, pro rata with the carrying amounts of those assets. These
increases in carrying amounts shall be treated as reversals of impairment losses for individual
assets and recognised as discussed above.
In allocating a reversal of an impairment loss for a cash-generating unit, the carrying amount
of an asset shall not be increased above the lower of:
(a) its recoverable amount (if determinable); and
(b) the carrying amount that would have been determined (net of amortisation or
depreciation) had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior periods.
The amount of the reversal of the impairment loss that would otherwise have been allocated
to the asset is allocated pro rata to the other assets of the unit, except for goodwill.
4.10.5 Reversing an impairment loss for goodwill not permitted
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill shall not be reversed in a subsequent period.
Ind AS 38 Intangible Assets prohibits the recognition of internally generated goodwill. Any
increase in the recoverable amount of goodwill in the periods following the recognition of an
impairment loss for that goodwill is likely to be an increase in internally generated goodwill,
rather than a reversal of the impairment loss recognised for the acquired goodwill.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.175
Illustration 10: Reversal of Impairment Loss
4,00,000. The fair value
On 1st April 20X1, Venus Ltd acquired 100% of Saturn Ltd for
of the identifiable assets of Saturn Ltd was 3,20,000 and goodwill was 80,000.
Saturn Ltd is in coal mining business. On 31st March, 20X3, the government cancelled
licenses given to it in few states.
As a result Saturn's Ltd revenue is estimated to get reduce by 30%. The adverse change
in market place and regulatory conditions is an indicator of impairment. As a result,
Venus Ltd has to estimate the recoverable amount of goodwill and assets of Saturn Ltd on
31st March, 20X3.
Venus Ltd uses straight line depreciation. The useful life of Saturn's Ltd assets is estimated
to be 20 years with no residual value. No independent cash inflows can be identified to
any individual assets. So, the entire operation of Saturn Ltd is to be treated as a CGU.
Due to the regulatory entangle it is not possible to determine the selling price of Saturn Ltd
as a CGU. Its value in use is estimated by the management at 2,12,000.
Suppose by 31st March, 20X5 the government reinstates the licenses of Saturn Ltd. The
management expects a favourable change in net cashflows. This is an indicator that an
impairment loss may have reversed. The recoverable amount of Saturn's Ltd asset is
re-estimated. The value in use is expected to be 3,04,000 and fair value less cost to
disposal is expected to be 2,90,000.
Calculate the impairment loss, if any. Also advise the accounting treatment for reversal of
impairment loss and the subsequent depreciation thereon.
Solution
Since the fair value less costs of disposal is not determinable the recoverable amount of
the CGU is its value in use. The carrying amount of the assets of the CGU on 31st March,
20X3 is as follows:
Calculation of Impairment loss
Revised Carrying Amount
•
Impairment Loss = Carrying Amount - Recoverable Amount (3,68,000 -  2,12,000)
$=:1,56,000$ is charged in statement of profit and loss for the period ending
31st March, 20X3 as impairment loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.176
FINANCIAL REPORTING
•
Impairment loss is allocated first to goodwill  80,000 and remaining loss of 76,000
( 1,56,000-80,000) is allocated to the other assets.
Reversal of Impairment loss
Reversal of impairment loss is recognised subject to:-
• The impairment loss on goodwill cannot be reversed.
•
The increased carrying amount of an asset after reversal of an impairment loss not to
exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss
been recognised in prior years.
Calculation of carrying amount of identifiable assets had no impairment loss is
recognised
Carrying amount of other assets after recognition of impairment loss
of re-estimated recoverable amount is
disposal 2,90,000 and value in use  3,04,000)
• The impairment loss recognised previously can be reversed only to the extent of lower
2,56,000 (higher of fair value less costs of
•
•
•
Impairment loss reversal will be
68,000 i.e. (₹2,56,000-₹1,88,000). This amount
is recognised as income in the statement of profit and loss for the year ended
31st March, 20X5.
The carrying amount of other assets at 31st March, 20X5 after reversal of impairment
loss will be 2,56,000.
From 1st April, 20X5 the depreciation charge will be  16,000 i.e. ( 2,56,000/16)
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.177
Reversal of impairment loss (IP)
General
Individual asset
Cash-generating unit
Goodwill
Not
permitted
Impairment loss is reversed if,
and only if, there has been a
change in the estimates used
to determine the asset's
recoverable amount
its
Carrying amount of the asset
is increased to
recoverable amount
Impairment loss is not
reversed just because of
the passage of time, even if
the recoverable amount of
the asset becomes higher
than its carrying amount
Asset without
revaluation
On reversal, the
increased carrying
amount of an asset
(other
than
goodwill) due to
reversal of an
impairment loss
shall not exceed
the
carrying
amount (net
amortization
of
/
depreciation) had
no impairment loss
been recognised
for the asset in prior
years
Reversal shall be allocated to the
assets of the unit (except for
goodwill) on pro rata with the
carrying amount of those assets
↓
Increases in carrying amounts shall be treated as
reversals of impairment losses for individual assets.
In allocating a reversal of an impairment loss for a
CGU, the carrying amount of an asset shall not be
increased above the lower of:
a) its recoverable amount; and
b) the carrying amount (net of amortisation or depreciation)
determines had no impairment loss been recognised for
the asset in prior periods.
The reversal of the impairment loss that would otherwise
have been allocated to the asset is allocated pro rata to
the other assets of the unit, except for goodwill
Asset with revaluation in the earlier years
A reversal of an
impairment
loss
(other than goodwill)
is
recognised
immediately in profit
or loss unless the
asset is carried at
revalued amount
Any increase in
excess of this
amount would be a
revaluation
accounted for under
appropriate
Standard
A reversal of an
impairment loss
on
revalued
a
asset
recognised in OCI
and increases the
revaluation
is
surplus for that
asset
To the extent that an
impairment loss on
the same revalued
asset was previously
recognised in profit
or loss, a reversal of
that impairment loss
is also recognised in
profit or loss
After
reversal, the depreciation /
amortisation charge for the asset is
adjusted in future periods on a systematic
basis over its remaining useful life
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.178
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.10.6 Non-controlling interests - the impact on goodwill impairment
testing
The amount of goodwill recorded by an entity when it acquires a controlling stake in a subsidiary
that is less than 100% of its equity depends on which of the two following methods have been used
to calculate it. Under Ind AS 103 'Business Combinations' an entity has a choice between two
methods:
i.
ii.
Goodwill attributable to the non-controlling interests (NCI) is not recognised in the parent's
consolidated financial statements as the non-controlling interest is stated at its
proportion of the net fair value of the net identifiable assets of the acquiree.
The NCI is measured at its acquisition-date fair value, which means that its share of goodwill
will also be recognised.
Under method (i) above the carrying amount of that CGU comprises:
(a)
(b)
both the parent's interest and the non-controlling interest in the identifiable net assets of the
CGU; and
the parent's interest in goodwill.
But part of the recoverable amount of the CGU determined in accordance with Ind AS 36 is
attributable to the non-controlling interest in goodwill.
Ind AS 103 allows both measurement methods. The choice of method is to be made for each
business combination, rather than being a policy choice, and could have a significant effect on the
amount recognized for goodwill.
The Standard states that not all of the goodwill arising will necessarily be allocated to a CGU or
group of CGUs which includes the subsidiary with NCI.
If an entity measures NCI as its proportionate interest in the net identifiable assets of a subsidiary
at the acquisition date, rather than at fair value, goodwill attributable to NCI is included in the
recoverable amount of the related cash-generating unit but is not recognised in the parent's
consolidated financial statements. As a consequence, an entity shall gross up the carrying amount
of goodwill allocated to the unit to include the goodwill attributable to NCI. This adjusted carrying
amount is then compared with the recoverable amount of the unit to determine whether the cash
generating unit is impaired.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.179
Below is the guidance given on the allocation of impairment losses:
(a)
(b)
If a subsidiary, or part of a subsidiary, with NCI is itself a CGU, the impairment loss is
allocated between the parent and NCI on the same basis as that on which profit or loss is
allocated.
If it is part of a larger CGU, goodwill impairment losses are allocated to the parts of the CGU
that have a NCI and the parts that do not on the following basis:
(i)
(ii)
to the extent that the impairment relates to goodwill in the CGU, the relative carrying
values of the goodwill of the parts before the impairment; and
to the extent that the impairment relates to identifiable assets in the CGU, the relative
carrying values of these assets before the impairment. Any such impairment is
allocated to the assets of the parts of each unit pro-rata on the basis of the carrying
amount of each asset in the part.
In those parts that have NCI, the impairment loss is allocated between the parent and NCI on the
same basis as that on which profit or loss is allocated.
If an impairment loss attributable to NCI relates to goodwill that is not recognised in the parent's
consolidated financial statements, that impairment is not recognised as a goodwill impairment loss.
In such cases, only the impairment loss relating to the goodwill that is allocated to the parent is
recognised as a goodwill impairment loss.
Illustration 11 - NCI measurement and Goodwill impairment
A Ltd acquires 80% shares of a subsidiary B Ltd. for 3,200 thousand. At the date of acquisition,
B Ltd.'s identifiable net assets is  3,000 thousand. A elects to measure NCI at proportionate
share of net identifiable assets. It recognises
At the end of next financial year, B Ltd.'s carrying amount is reduced to 2,700 thousand
(excluding goodwill).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.180
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Recoverable amount of B Ltd.'s assets is
Case $(i)\mp2,000$ thousand,
Case (ii) 2,800 thousand
Calculate impairment loss allocable to Parent and NCI in both the cases.
Solution
Case (i)
in thousand
Case (ii)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.181
It is to be noted that since an entity measures NCI at its proportionate interest in the net identifiable
assets of a subsidiary at the acquisition date, rather than at fair value, goodwill attributable to NCI
is not recognised in the parent's consolidated financial statements and so the impairment loss on
such goodwill not recognised.
*****
4.11 DISCLOSURE
4.11.1 Disclosure - general
An entity is required to disclose the following for each class of assets:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the amount of impairment losses recognised in profit or loss during the period and the
line item(s) of the statement of profit and loss in which those impairment losses are
included;
the amount of reversals of impairment losses recognised in profit or loss during the
period and the line item(s) of the statement of profit and loss in which those impairment
losses are reversed;
the amount of impairment losses on revalued assets recognised in other
comprehensive income during the period; and
the amount of reversals of impairment losses on revalued assets recognised in other
comprehensive income during the period.
The information required as above may be presented with other information disclosed for the
class of assets. For example, this information may be included in a reconciliation of the
carrying amount of property, plant and equipment, at the beginning and end of the period, as
required by Ind AS 16.
4.11.2 Entities reporting segment information
An entity that reports segment information in accordance with Ind AS 108 shall disclose the
following for each reportable segment:
(a)
the amount of impairment losses recognised in profit or loss and in other
comprehensive income during the period; and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.182
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b) the amount of reversals of impairment losses recognised in profit or loss and in other
comprehensive income during the period.
4.11.3 Impairment losses recognised or reversed in the period
An entity is required to disclose the following for each material impairment loss recognised or
reversed during the period for an individual asset, including goodwill, or a cash-generating
unit:
the events and circumstances that led to the recognition or reversal of the impairment
loss;
the amount of the impairment loss recognised or reversed;
(a)
(b)
(c)
for an individual asset:
(i)
the nature of the asset; and
(ii)
if the entity reports segment information in accordance with Ind AS 108, the
reportable segment to which the asset belongs;
(d)
for a cash-generating unit:
(i)
(e)
(f)
(ii)
(iii)
a description of the cash-generating unit (such as whether it is a product line,
a plant, a business operation, a geographical area, or a reportable segment as
defined in Ind AS 108);
the amount of the impairment loss recognised or reversed by class of assets
and, if the entity reports segment information in accordance Ind AS 108, by
reportable segment; and
if the aggregation of assets for identifying the cash-generating unit has changed
since the previous estimate of the cash-generating unit's recoverable amount
(if any), a description of the current and former way of aggregating assets and
the reasons for changing the way the cash-generating unit is identified;
the recoverable amount of the asset or CGU, and whether the recoverable amount of
the asset (cash-generating unit) is its fair value less costs of disposal or its value in
use;
if recoverable amount is fair value less costs of disposal, the entity shall disclose the
following information:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.183
(g)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the level of the fair value hierarchy (refer Ind AS 113) within which the fair value
measurement of the asset (cash-generating unit) is categorised in its entirety
(without taking into account whether the 'costs of disposal' are observable);
for fair value measurements categorised within Level 2 and Level 3 of the fair
value hierarchy, a description of the valuation technique(s) used to measure
fair value less costs of disposal. If there has been a change in valuation
technique, the entity shall disclose that change and the reason(s) for making it;
and
for fair value measurements categorised within Level 2 and Level 3 of the fair
value hierarchy, each key assumption on which management has based its
determination of fair value less costs of disposal. Key assumptions are those
to which the asset's (cash-generating unit's) recoverable amount is most
sensitive. The entity shall also disclose the discount rate(s) used in the current
measurement and previous measurement if fair value less costs of disposal is
measured using a present value technique.
if recoverable amount is value in use, the discount rate(s) used in the current estimate
and previous estimate (if any) of value in use.
4.11.4 Other impairment losses/reversals material in aggregate to the
financial statements
An entity shall disclose the following information for the aggregate impairment losses and the
aggregate reversals of impairment losses recognised during the period for which no information is
disclosed in above paragraph:
(a)
(b)
the main classes of assets affected by impairment losses and the main classes of assets
affected by reversals of impairment losses; and
the main events and circumstances that led to the recognition of these impairment losses and
reversals of impairment losses.
4.11.5 Unallocated goodwill
If any portion of the goodwill acquired in a business combination during the period has not been
allocated to a cash-generating unit (group of units) at the end of the reporting period, the amount of
the unallocated goodwill shall be disclosed together with the reasons why that amount remains
unallocated.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.184
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.11.6 Information to be disclosed for CGUs to which significant
goodwill or indefinite - life intangible assets have been allocated
An entity is required to disclose the following information for each cash-generating unit (group of
units) for which the carrying amount of goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite useful lives
allocated to that unit (group of units) is significant in comparison with the entity's total carrying
amount of goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite useful lives:
(a)
the carrying amount of goodwill allocated to the unit (group of units);
(b)
(c)
(d)
the carrying amount of intangible assets with indefinite useful lives allocated to the unit (group
of units);
the basis on which the unit's (group of units') recoverable amount has been determined (ie
value in use or fair value less costs of disposal);
if the unit's (group of units') recoverable amount is based on value in use:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
each key assumption on which management has based its cash flow projections for
the period covered by the most recent budgets/forecasts. Key assumptions are those
to which the unit's (group of units') recoverable amount is most sensitive.
a description of management's approach to determining the value(s) assigned to each
key assumption, whether those value(s) reflect past experience or, if appropriate, are
consistent with external sources of information, and, if not, how and why they differ
from past experience or external sources of information.
the period over which management has projected cash flows based on financial
budgets/forecasts approved by management and, when a period greater than five
years is used for a cash-generating unit (group of units), an explanation of why that
longer period is justified.
(iv) the growth rate used to extrapolate cash flow projections beyond the period covered
by the most recent budgets/forecasts, and the justification for using any growth rate
that exceeds the long-term average growth rate for the products, industries, or country
or countries in which the entity operates, or for the market to which the unit (group of
units) is dedicated.
(e)
the discount rate(s) applied to the cash flow projections.
(f)
if the unit's (group of units') recoverable amount is based on fair value less costs of disposal,
the valuation technique(s) used to measure fair value less costs of disposal. An entity is not
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.185
required to provide the disclosures required by Ind AS 113. If fair value less costs of disposal
is not measured using a quoted price for an identical unit (group of units), an entity shall
disclose the following information:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
each key assumption on which management has based its determination of fair value
less costs of disposal. Key assumptions are those to which the unit's (group of units')
recoverable amount is most sensitive;
a description of management's approach to determining the value (or values) assigned
to each key assumption, whether those values reflect past experience or, if
appropriate, are consistent with external sources of information, and, if not, how and
why they differ from past experience or external sources of information;
the level of the fair value hierarchy (see Ind AS 113 within which the fair value
measurement is categorised in its entirety (without giving regard to the observability
of 'costs of disposal'); and
if there has been a change in valuation technique, the change and the reason(s) for
making it. If fair value less costs of disposal is measured using discounted cash flow
projections, an entity shall disclose the following information:
the period over which management has projected cash flows;
(v)
(vi)
the growth rate used to extrapolate cash flow projections; and
(vii)
the discount rate(s) applied to the cash flow projections.
(g)
if a reasonably possible change in a key assumption on which management has based its
determination of the unit's (group of units') recoverable amount would cause the unit's (group
of units') carrying amount to exceed its recoverable amount:
(i)
the amount by which the unit's (group of units') recoverable amount exceeds its
carrying amount;
(ii)
the value assigned to the key assumption; and
(iii)
the amount by which the value assigned to the key assumption must change, after
incorporating any consequential effects of that change on the other variables used to
measure recoverable amount, in order for the unit's (group of units') recoverable
amount to be equal to its carrying amount.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.186
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.11.7 Information to be disclosed for CGUs to which insignificant
goodwill or indefinite-life intangible assets have been allocated
If some or all of the carrying amount of goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite useful
lives is allocated across multiple cash-generating units (groups of units), and the amount so
allocated to each unit (group of units) is not significant in comparison with the entity's total
carrying amount of goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, that fact shall be
disclosed, together with the aggregate carrying amount of goodwill or intangible assets with
indefinite useful lives allocated to those units (groups of units).
In addition, if the recoverable amounts of any of those units (groups of units) are based on
the same key assumption(s) and the aggregate carrying amount of goodwill or intangible
assets with indefinite useful lives allocated to them is significant in comparison with the
entity's total carrying amount of goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, an
entity shall disclose that fact, together with:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the aggregate carrying amount of goodwill allocated to those units (groups of units);
the aggregate carrying amount of intangible assets with indefinite useful lives allocated
to those units (groups of units);
a description of the key assumption(s);
a description of management's approach to determining the value(s) assigned to the
key assumption(s), whether those value(s) reflect past experience or, if appropriate,
are consistent with external sources of information, and, if not, how and why they differ
from past experience or external sources of information; and
if a reasonably possible change in the key assumption(s) would cause the aggregate
of the units' (groups of units') carrying amounts to exceed the aggregate of their
recoverable amounts:
(i)
the amount by which the aggregate of the units' (groups of units') recoverable
amounts exceeds the aggregate of their carrying amounts;
(ii)
the value(s) assigned to the key assumption(s); and
(iii)
the amount by which the value(s) assigned to the key assumption(s) must
change, after incorporating any consequential effects of the change on the
other variables used to measure recoverable amount, in order for the aggregate
of the units' (groups of units') recoverable amounts to be equal to the aggregate
of their carrying amounts.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.187
The most recent detailed calculation made in a preceding period of the recoverable amount
of a cash-generating unit (group of units) may, in accordance with paragraph 24 or 99, be
carried forward and used in the impairment test for that unit (group of units) in the current
period provided specified criteria are met. When this is the case, the information for that unit
(group of units) that is incorporated into the disclosures required by paragraphs 134 and 135
relate to the carried forward calculation of recoverable amount.
Illustration 12
From the following details of an asset, compute:
(a) Impairment loss and its treatment.
(b) Current year depreciation for the year end.
Particulars of assets:
Solution
Impairment loss
Impairment loss = Carrying amount of the asset - Recoverable amount
$=\vec{7}27.30~lakh-\vec{\times}12~lakh=\vec{\times}15.30~lakt$
Treatment of impairment loss
As per Ind AS 36, impairment loss (whether of an individual asset of a CGU) is recognised in the
following manner:
(a) Impairment loss of a revalued asset: It is recognised in other comprehensive income to the
extent that the impairment loss does not exceed the amount held in the revaluation surplus
for that same asset. The balance, if any, is recognised as an expense in the statement of
profit and loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.188
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b) Impairment loss of other assets: Impairment loss of any other asset should be recognised
as an expense in the statement of profit and loss.
Since, the asset in question has been revalued upwards, the impairment loss will be adjusted first
against the revaluation surplus of 14 lakh. The balance amount of 1.30 lakh will be recognised
as an expense in the profit and loss account.
Current year depreciation
*****
Illustration 13
Venus Ltd. has an asset, which is carried in the Balance Sheet on 31st March, 20X1 at ₹500 lakh.
As at that date the value in use is ₹400 lakh and the fair value less costs to sells is 375 lakh.
From the above data:
(a)
Calculate impairment loss.
(b)
Prepare journal entries for adjustment of impairment loss.
Solution
According to Ind AS 36, Impairment of Assets, impairment loss is the excess of 'Carrying amount of
the asset' over 'Recoverable Amount'.
In the present case, the impairment loss can be computed in the following manner: Step 1: Fair value
less costs to sell: 375 lakh
Step 2: Value in use:  400 lakh
Step 3: Recoverable amount, i.e., higher of 'fair value less costs to sell' & 'value in use'.
Thus, recoverable amount is 400 lakh
Step 4: Carrying amount of the asset 500 lakh
Step 5: Impairment loss, i.e., excess of amount computed in step 4 over amount computed in Step 3.
100 lakh (being the difference between 500 lakh and 400 lakh).
According to Ind AS 36, an impairment loss should be recognised as an expense in the statement
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.189
of profit and loss immediately, unless the asset is carried at revalued amount in accordance with
another Accounting Standard. Assuming, that the asset is not carried at revalued amount, the
impairment loss of 100 lakh will be charged to Profit & Loss Account.
Journal Entries
*****
Illustration 14
A publisher owns 150 magazine titles of which 70 were purchased and 80 were self-created. The
price paid for a purchased magazine title is recognised as an intangible asset. The costs of creating
magazine titles and maintaining the existing titles are recognised as an expense when incurred.
Cash inflows from direct sales and advertising are identifiable for each magazine title. Titles are
managed by customer segments. The level of advertising income for a magazine title depends on
the range of titles in the customer segment to which the magazine title relates. Management has a
policy to abandon old titles before the end of their economic lives and replace them immediately with
new titles for the same customer segment.
Identify the cash-generating unit for an individual magazine title.
Solution
It is likely that the recoverable amount of an individual magazine title can be assessed. Even though
the level of advertising income for a title is influenced, to a certain extent, by the other titles in the
customer segment, cash inflows from direct sales and advertising are identifiable for each title. In
addition, although titles are managed by customer segments, decisions to abandon titles are made
on an individual title basis. Therefore, it is likely that individual magazine titles generate cash inflows
that are largely independent of each other, and that each magazine title is a separate cash-
generating unit.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
5.190
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 15
A mining entity owns a private railway to support its mining activities. The private railway could
be sold only for scrap value and it does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of
the cash inflows from the other assets of the mine.
Recommend whether the entity should determine the recoverable amount for the private railway
or for the mining business as a whole.
Solution
It is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of the private railway because its value in use
cannot be determined and is probably different from scrap value. Therefore, the entity estimates
the recoverable amount of the cash-generating unit to which the private railway belongs, i.e., the
mine as a whole.
*****
Illustration 16
A bus company provides services under contract with a municipality that requires minimum service
on each of seven separate routes. Assets devoted to each route and the cash flows from each
route can be identified separately. One of the routes operates at a significant loss.
Examine whether the company should determine the recoverable amount for an individual asset
or for a cash generating unit.
Solution
Because the entity does not have the option to curtail any one bus route, the lowest level of
identifiable cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups
of assets is the cash inflows generated by the seven routes together. The cash-generating unit for
each route is the bus company as a whole.
*****
Illustration 17
A significant raw material used for plant Y's final production is an intermediate product bought
from plant X of the same entity. X's products are sold to Y at a transfer price that passes all
margins to X. 80% of Y's final production is sold to customers outside of the entity.
60% of X's final production is sold to Y and the remaining 40% is sold to customers outside of the
entity. For each of the following cases, evaluate the cash-generating units for X and Y?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.191
(a)
(b)
If X could sell the products it sells to Y in an active market and internal transfer prices are
higher than market prices, what are the cash-generating units for X and Y?
If there is no active market for the products X sells to Y, what are the cash-generating units
for X and Y?
Solution
(a) Cash-generating unit for X: X could sell its products in an active market and, so, generate
cash inflows that would be largely independent of the cash inflows from Y. Therefore, it is
likely that X is a separate cash-generating unit, although part of its production is used by Y.
Cash-generating unit for Y: It is likely that Y is also a separate cash-generating unit. Y sells
80% of its products to customers outside of the entity. Therefore, its cash inflows can be
regarded as largely independent.
Effect of internal transfer pricing: Internal transfer prices do not reflect market prices for
X's output. Therefore, in determining value in use of both X and Y, the entity adjusts financial
budgets/forecasts to reflect management's best estimate of future prices that could be
achieved in arm's length transactions for those of X's products that are used internally.
(b) Cash-generating units for X and Y: It is likely that the recoverable amount of each plant
cannot be assessed independently of the recoverable amount of the other plant because:
(i)
(ii)
the majority of X's production is used internally and could not be sold in an active
market. So, cash inflows of X depend on demand for Y's products. Therefore, X cannot
be considered to generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those of Y.
the two plants are managed together.
As a consequence, it is likely that X and Y together are the smallest group of assets that
generates cash inflows that are largely independent.
*****
Illustration 18
XYZ Limited produces a single product and owns plants 1, 2 and 3. Each plant is located in a
different country. Plant 1 produces a component that is assembled in either Plant 2 or Plant 3.
The combined capacity of Plant 2 and Plant 3 is not fully utilised. XYZ Limited's products are sold
worldwide from either Plant 2 or Plant 3, e.g., Plant 2's production can be sold in Plant 3's country
if the products can be delivered faster from Plant 2 than from Plant 3. Utilisation levels of Plant 2
and Plant 3 depend on the allocation of sales between the two sites.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.192
FINANCIAL REPORTING
If there is no active market for Plant 1's products, evaluate what are the cash-generating units for
Plant 1, Plant 2 and Plant 3?
Solution
It is likely that the recoverable amount of each plant cannot be assessed independently because:
(a)
(b)
There is no active market for Plant 1's products. Therefore, Plant 1's cash inflows depend
on sales of the final product by Plant 2 and Plant 3.
Although there is an active market for the products assembled by Plant 2 and Plant 3, cash
inflows for Plant 2 and Plant 3 depend on the allocation of production across the two sites. It
is unlikely that the future cash inflows for Plant 2 and Plant 3 can be determined individually.
As a consequence, it is likely that Plant 1, Plant 2 and Plant 3 together (i.e., XYZ Limited as a whole)
are the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows that are largely independent.
*****
Illustration 19
Goodwill had previously been allocated to cash-generating unit A. The goodwill allocated to A
cannot be identified or associated with an asset group at a level lower than A, except arbitrarily.
A is to be divided and integrated into three other cash-generating units, B, C and D.
Recommend how the goodwill should be reallocated to B, C and D.
Solution
Since goodwill allocated to A cannot be non-arbitrarily identified or associated with an asset group
at a level lower than A, it is reallocated to units B, C and D on the basis of the relative values of the
three portions of A before those portions are integrated with B, C and D.
*****
Illustration 20
XYZ Limited has a cash-generating unit 'Plant A' as on 1st April, 20X1 having a carrying amount
of 1,000 crore. Plant A was acquired under a business combination and goodwill of 200 crore
was allocated to it. It is depreciated on straight line basis. Plant A has a useful life of 10 years
with no residual value. On 31st March, 20X2, Plant A has a recoverable amount of ₹600 crore.
Calculate the impairment loss on Plant A. Also, determine its allocation as per Ind AS 36.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.193
Since, the recoverable amount is 600 crore, there is an impairment loss of 500 crore. The
impairment loss of 500 crore should be allocated to goodwill first, and then to the other identifiable
assets, i.e., 200 crore to goodwill and
300 crore to identifiable assets of Plant A.
*****
Illustration 21
Sun Ltd is an entity with various subsidiaries. The entity closes its books of account at every
year ended on 31st March. On 1st July, 20X1, Sun Ltd acquired an 80% interest in Pluto Ltd.
Details of the acquisition were as follows:
Sun Ltd acquired 800,000 shares in Pluto Ltd by issuing two equity shares for every five
acquired. The fair value of Sun Ltd's share on 1st July, 20X1 was 4 per share and the
fair value of a Pluto's share was 1.40 per share. The costs of issue were 5% per share.
Sun Ltd incurred further legal and professional costs of ₹100,000 that directly related to
the acquisition.
The fair values of the identifiable net assets of Pluto Ltd at 1st July, 20X1 were measured
at 1.3 million. Sun Ltd initially measured the non-controlling interest in Pluto Ltd at fair
value. They used the market value of a Pluto Ltd share for this purpose. No impairment
of goodwill arising on the acquisition of Pluto Ltd was required at 31st March, 20X2 or
20X3.
Pluto Ltd comprises three cash generating units A, B and C. When Pluto Ltd was acquired the
directors of Sun Ltd estimated that the goodwill arising on acquisition could reasonably be
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.194
FINANCIAL REPORTING
allocated to units A:B:C on a 2:2:1 basis. The carrying values of the assets in these cash
generating units and their recoverable amounts are as follows:
Required:
(i)
Compute the carrying value of the goodwill arising on acquisition of Pluto Ltd in the
consolidated Balance Sheet of Sun Ltd at 31st March, 20X4 following the impairment
review.
(ii) Compute the total impairment loss arising as a result of the impairment review,
identifying how much of this loss would be allocated to the non-controlling interests in
Pluto Ltd.
Solution
1. Computation of goodwill on acquisition
Acquisition costs are not included as part of the fair value of the consideration given under
Ind AS 103, Business Combination.
Calculation of impairment loss
* After writing down assets in the individual CGU to recoverable amount.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.195
2. Calculation of closing goodwill
3.
Calculation of overall impairment loss
21.2 (20%) of the above is allocated to the NCI with the balance allocated to the
shareholders of Sun Ltd.
*****
4.12 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity  Hindustan Unilever Limited'
for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to impairment and the accounting policy thereon.
Impairment
Assessment for impairment is done at each Balance Sheet date as to whether there is any indication that a non-financial
asset may be impaired. Indefinite life intangible assets are subject to a review for impairment annually or more frequently
if events or circumstances indicate that it is necessary. For the purpose of assessing impairment, the smallest identifiable
group of assets that generates cash inflows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash inflows from
other assets or groups of assets is considered as a cash generating unit. Goodwill acquired in a business combination is,
from the acquisition date, allocated to each of the Groups's cash-generating units that are expected to benefit from the
synergies of the combination, irrespective of whether other assets or liabilities of the acquiree are assigned to those units.
If any indication of impairment exists, an estimate of the recoverable amount of the individual asset/cash generating
unit is made. Asset/cash generating unit whose carrying value exceeds their recoverable amount are written down
to the recoverable amount by recognising the impairment loss as an expense in the Consolidated Statement of
Profit and Loss.
The impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of goodwill (if any) allocated to the cash generating
unit and then to the other assets of the unit, pro rata based on the carrying amount of each asset in the unit. Recoverable
amount is higher of an asset's or cash generating unit's value in use and its fair value less cost of disposal. Value in use
is estimated future cash flows expected to arise from the continuing use of an asset or cash generating unit and from its
disposal at the end of its useful life discounted to their present value using a post-tax discount rate that reflects current
market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset. In determining fair value less costs of
disposal, recent market transactions are considered. If no such transactions can be identified, an appropriate valuation
model is used.
Assessment is also done at each Balance Sheet date as to whether there is any indication that an impairment loss
recognised for an asset in prior accounting periods may no longer exist or may have decreased. Basis the assessment
a reversal of an impairment loss for an asset other than goodwill is recognised in the consolidated statement of
profit and loss.
No impairment was identified in FY 2021-22 (FY 2020-21: Nil).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.196
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Significant Cash Generating Units (CGUs)
The Group has identified its reportable segments, i.e. Home Care, Beauty & Personal Care, Foods & Refreshment and
Others as the CGUs. The goodwill and indefinite-life intangible assets acquired through business combinations have
been allocated to CGU 'Beauty & Personal Care' and "Foods & Refreshment". The carrying amount of goodwill and
indefinite-life intangible assets is as under:
The recoverable amount of each CGU has been calculated based on its value in use, estimated as the present value of
projected future cash flows.
Following key assumptions were considered while performing Impairment testing:
The projections cover a period of five years, as the Group believes this to be the most appropriate timescale over which to
review and consider annual performances before applying a fixed terminal value multiple to the final year cash flows. The
growth rates and segmental margins used to estimate cash flows for the first five years are based on past performance,
and on the Group's five-year strategic plan.
Weighted Average Cost of Capital % (WACC) for the Group = Risk free return + (Market risk premium x Beta for the
Holding Company).
The Group has performed sensitivity analysis around the base assumptions and has concluded that there are no
reasonably possible changes to key assumptions that would cause the carrying amount of a CGU to exceed its
recoverable amount.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - 'Hindustan Unilever Limited)
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.197
4.13 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 36 VIS-À-VIS
AS 28
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.198
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.199
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
2.
Apex Ltd. is engaged in manufacturing of steel utensils. It owns a building for its
headquarters. The building used to be fully occupied for internal use. However, recently the
company has undertaken a massive downsizing exercise as a result of which 1/3rd of the
building became vacant. This vacant portion has now been given for on lease for 6 years.
Determine the CGU of the building.
ABC Ltd. has three cash-generating units: A, B and C, the carrying amounts of which as on
31st March, 20X1 are as follows:
( in crore)
ABC Ltd. also has two corporate assets having a remaining useful life of 20 years.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.200
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Recoverable amount as on 31st March, 20X1 is as follows:
Calculate the impairment loss, if any. Ignore decimals.
3. Parent acquires an 80% ownership interest in Subsidiary for 2,100 on 1st April, 20X1. At
that date, Subsidiary's net identifiable assets have a fair value of  1,500. Parent chooses
to measure the non-controlling interests as the proportionate interest of Subsidiary's net
identifiable assets. The assets of Subsidiary together are the smallest group of assets that
generate cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or
groups of assets. Since other cash-generating units of Parent are expected to benefit from
the synergies of the combination, the goodwill of 500 related to those synergies has been
allocated to other cash-generating units within Parent. On 31st March, 20X2, Parent
determines that the recoverable amount of cash-generating unit Subsidiary is  1,000. The
carrying amount of the net assets of Subsidiary, excluding goodwill, is  1,350.
4.
Allocate the impairment loss on 31st March, 20X2.
A Ltd. purchased a machinery of 100 crore on 1st April, 20X1. The machinery has a useful
life of 5 years. It has nil residual value. A Ltd. adopts straight line method of depreciation for
depreciating the machinery.
31st March, 20X2:
Following information has been provided as on
Calculate the impairment loss, if any.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.201
5.
6.
Assuming in the above question, as on 31st March, 20X3, there is no change in the estimated
future cash flows and discount rate. Fair value less costs to sell as on 31st March, 20X3 is
* 40 crore.
Advise, how it should deal with under Ind AS 36.
A Ltd. purchased an asset of 100 lakh on 1st April, 20X0. It has useful life of 4 years with
no residual value. Recoverable amount of the asset is as follows:
7.
Calculate the amount of impairment loss or its reversal, if any, on 31st March, 20X1,
31st March, 20X2 and 31st March, 20X3.
On 31st March, 20X1, XYZ Ltd. makes following estimate of cash flows for one of its asset
located in USA:
Following information has been provided:
Exchange rates are as follows:
Calculate value in use as on 31st March, 20X1.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.202
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Answers
1.
2.
CGU of the building is Apex Ltd. as a whole as the primary purpose of the building is to serve
as a corporate asset.
Allocation of corporate assets
The carrying amount of X is allocated to the carrying amount of each individual cash-
generating unit. A weighted allocation basis is used because the estimated remaining useful
life of A's cash-generating unit is 10 years, whereas the estimated remaining useful lives of
B and C's cash-generating units are 20 years.
Calculation of impairment loss
Step  : Impairment losses for individual cash-generating units and its allocation
(a) Impairment loss of each cash-generating units
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.203
(b) Allocation of the impairment loss between cash-generating units and corporate
asset X, on a pro rata basis, as follows
Step II: Impairment losses for the larger cash-generating unit, i.e., ABC Ltd. as
a whole
3.
Non-controlling interests is measured as the proportionate interest of Subsidiary's net
identifiable assets, i.e., ₹300 (20% of  1,500). Goodwill is the difference between the
aggregate of the consideration transferred and the amount of the non-controlling interests
$(\overline{r}2,100+\overline{r}300)$ and the net identifiable assets (1,500), i.e.,  900.
Since, the assets of Subsidiary together are the smallest group of assets that generate cash
inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets,
therefore, Subsidiary is a cash-generating unit. Since other cash-generating units of Parent
are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination, the goodwill of 500 related
to those synergies has been allocated to other cash-generating units within Parent. Because
the cash-generating unit comprising Subsidiary includes goodwill within its carrying amount,
it should be tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if there is an indication that it
may be impaired.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.204
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Testing Subsidiary (cash-generating unit) for impairment
Goodwill attributable to non-controlling interests is included in Subsidiary's recoverable
amount of 1,000 but has not been recognised in Parent's consolidated financial statements.
Therefore, the carrying amount of Subsidiary should be grossed up to include goodwill
attributable to the non-controlling interests, before being compared with the recoverable
amount of  1,000. Goodwill attributable to Parent's 80% interest in Subsidiary at the
acquisition date is 400 after allocating 500 to other cash-generating units within Parent.
Therefore, goodwill attributable to the 20% non-controlling interests in Subsidiary at the
acquisition date is 100.
Testing subsidiary for impairment on 31st March, 20X2
Allocating the impairment loss
The impairment loss of 850 should be allocated to the assets in the unit by first reducing
the carrying amount of goodwill.
Therefore,  500 of the 850 impairment loss for the unit is allocated to the goodwill. If the
partially owned subsidiary is itself a cash-generating unit, the goodwill impairment loss should
be allocated to the controlling and non-controlling interests on the same basis as that on
which profit or loss is allocated. In this case, profit or loss is allocated on the basis of relative
ownership interests. Because goodwill is recognised only to the extent of Parent's 80%
ownership interest in Subsidiary, Parent recognises only 80% of that goodwill impairment loss
(i.e.,  400).
The remaining impairment loss of 350 is recognised by reducing the carrying amounts of
Subsidiary's identifiable assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.205
Allocation of the impairment loss for Subsidiary on 31st March, 20X2
4. Value in use of the machinery as on 31st March, 20X2 can be calculated as follows:
The recoverable amount of the machinery is
75.31 crore (higher of value in use of
 75.31 crore and fair value less costs to sell of
70 crore). The carrying of the machinery
is 80 crore (after providing for one year depreciation @ 20 crore). Therefore, the
impairment loss of 4.69 crore should be provided in the books. Further, the impaired
carrying value of` 75.31 crore will be depreciated, on a straight-line basis, over the remaining
four years.
5.
Value in use of the machinery as on March 31,20X3 can be calculated as follows:
The recoverable amount of the machinery is
67.84 crore and fair value less costs to sell
machinery at the end of the year 20X2 is 56.48
depreciation (100  20 - 4.69) - 18.83).
67.84 crore (higher of value in use of
of 40 crore). Carrying amount of the
crore (after providing for two years
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.206
FINANCIAL REPORTING
6.
However, as per paragraph 116 of Ind AS 36, an impairment loss is not reversed just because
of the passage of time (sometimes called the 'unwinding' of the discount), even if the
recoverable amount of the asset becomes higher than its carrying amount. Reason being,
the underlying reasons for the original impairment have not been removed, and the service
potential of the asset has not increased.
Therefore, the impairment loss of 4.69 crore should not be reversed.
As on 31st March, 20X1
Therefore, an impairment loss of 15 lakh should be recognised as on 31st March, 20X1.
Depreciation for subsequent years should be charged on the carrying amount of the asset
(after providing for impairment loss), i.e., 60 lakh.
As on 31st March, 20X2
Therefore, no impairment loss should be recognised as on 31st March, 20X2.
As on 31st March, 20X3
Since, the recoverable amount of the asset exceeds the carrying amount of the asset by
8 lakh, impairment loss recognised earlier should be reversed. However, reversal of an
impairment loss should not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined
(net of amortisation or depreciation) had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in
prior years.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 36
5.207
Carrying amount as on 31st March, 20X3 had no impairment loss being recognised would
have been 25 lakh. Therefore, the reversal of an impairment loss of 5 lakh should be
done as on 31st March, 20X3.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
