5.208
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT 5 :
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38 : INTANGIBLE
ASSETS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to
State the scope of the standard
Define and identify intangible assets by applying the criteria given in the
standard
Measure the intangible assets on initial recognition
Analyse the principles of measurement under various modes of
acquisition
Apply the recognition and measurement principles on internally
intangible assets
Measure the intangible assets on subsequent recognition
Interpret the concept of useful life of an intangible asset and its
amortisation
Examine the principles of de-recognition
Produce the disclosures required in the standard
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
UNIT OVERVIEW
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.209
Objective
Prescribe the accounting
treatment for intangible assets
which are not dealt with by
another accounting standard
Amortisation of intangible assets
with finite useful life.
Review for annual impairment of
intangible assets with indefinite useful
lives
Intangible Asset may arise from:
Separate Acquisition
Part of a Business combination
Government Grant
Internally generated goodwill
Internally generated intangible
assets
Exchange of assets
Scope exclusion:
• Intangible assets covered by another
Standard
• Financial Assets
• Exploration and evaluation assets
• Minerals and non
resources
regenerative
Meaning of Intangible Asset
• Identifiable
• Non-monetary asset
• Without physical substance
Measurement of Intangible
Asset:
Intial measurement : At cost
Subsequent measurement:
Cost or Revaluation Model
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.210
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5.1 OBJECTIVE
The objective of this Standard is to prescribe the accounting treatment for intangible assets that are
not dealt with specifically in another Standard. This Standard requires an entity to recognize an
intangible asset if, and only if, specified criteria are met. This standard specifies the requirement of
recognition, measurement and disclosures of Intangible Assets.
The Standard states that intangible assets are initially measured at cost, subsequently measured at
cost or using the revaluation model, and amortised on a systematic basis over their useful lives
unless the asset has an indefinite useful life, in which case it is not amortised but tested for
impairment.
5.2 SCOPE
5.2.1 Applicability
This Standard shall be applied to all intangible assets, except:
(a) intangible assets that are within the scope of another Standard, for example:
Intangible assets held for sale in the ordinary course of business (Ind AS 2)
Deferred tax assets (Ind AS 12)
Leases of intangibles assets (Ind AS 116)
Assets arising from employee benefits (Ind AS 19)
Financial assets (Ind AS 32)
Goodwill arising in a business combination (Ind AS 103)
Contracts as per Ind AS 117, Insurance Contracts, and any assets for insurance acquisition cash
flows (Ind AS 117)
Non-current intangible assets classified as held for sale (or included in a disposal group that is classified
as held for sale) (Ind AS 105)
Assets arising from contracts with customers (Ind AS 115)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.211
(b)
financial assets, as defined in Ind AS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation;
(c)
(d)
the recognition and measurement of exploration and evaluation assets (see Ind AS 106,
Exploration for and Evaluation of Mineral Resources); and
expenditure on the development and extraction of minerals, oil, natural gas and similar
non-regenerative resources.
5.2.2 Intangible assets contained in or on a physical substance
Some intangible assets may be contained in or on a physical substance such as a compact disc (in
the case of computer software), legal documentation (in the case of a licence or patent) or film. In
determining whether an asset that incorporates both tangible and intangible elements should be
treated under Ind AS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment, or as an intangible asset under this
Standard, an entity uses judgement to assess which element is more significant.
For example, computer software for a computer-controlled machine tool that cannot operate
without that specific software is an integral part of the related hardware and it is treated as
property, plant and equipment. The same applies to the operating system of a computer. When
the software is not an integral part of the related hardware, computer software is treated as an
intangible asset.
The standard is also applicable to expenditure on advertising, training, start-up, research and
development activities. Research and development activities are directed to the development of
knowledge. Therefore, although these activities may result in an asset with physical substance (eg
a prototype), the physical element of the asset is secondary to its intangible component, ie the
knowledge embodied in it.
5.2.3 Intangible assets on leases
Rights under licensing agreements for items such as motion picture films, video recordings, plays,
manuscripts, patents and copyrights are excluded from the scope of Ind AS 116 and are within the
scope of this Standard.
5.2.4 Intangible assets used in the extractive and insurance industries
This Standard does not apply to expenditure on the exploration for, or development and extraction
of, oil, gas and mineral deposits in extractive industries and in the case of insurance contracts.
However, this Standard applies to other intangible assets used (such as computer software), and
other expenditure incurred (such as start-up costs), in extractive industries or by insurers.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.212
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5.2.5 Amortisation method specified in this standard not to apply to
intangible assets arising from service concession arrangements in
respect of toll roads
The amortisation method specified in this Standard does not apply to an entity that opts to amortise
the intangible assets arising from service concession arrangements in respect of toll roads
recognized in the financial statements for the period ending immediately before the beginning of
the first Ind AS reporting period as per the optional exemption given in Ind AS 101, First-time
Adoption of Indian Accounting Standards.
5.3 RELEVANT DEFINITIONS
The following are the key terms used in this standard:
Amortisation is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an intangible asset
over its useful life.
An asset* is a resource:
Resource controlled by
entity
As a result of past event
Asset
Future economic benefits are
expected to flow
(a)
controlled by an entity as a result of past events; and
(b)
from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the entity.
* The definition of an asset in this Standard is not revised following the revision of the definition of
an asset in the Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting under Indian Accounting Standards
issued in 2021 by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.213
Carrying amount is the amount at which an asset is recognized in the balance sheet after
deducting any accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses thereon.
Cost is the amount of cash or cash equivalents paid or the fair value of other consideration
given to acquire an asset at the time of its acquisition or construction, or, when applicable,
the amount attributed to that asset when initially recognized in accordance with the specific
requirements of other Indian Accounting Standards, for e.g Ind AS 102, Share-based
Payment.
Depreciable amount is the cost of an asset, or other amount substituted for cost, less its
residual value.
Development is the application of research findings or other knowledge to a plan or design
for the production of new or substantially improved materials, devices, products, processes,
systems or services before the start of commercial production or use.
Entity-specific value is the present value of the cash flows an entity expects to arise from
the continuing use of an asset and from its disposal at the end of its useful life or expects to
incur when settling a liability.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in
an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. (See
Ind AS 113, Fair Value Measurement.)
An impairment loss is the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its
recoverable amount.
An intangible asset is an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical substance.
Monetary assets are money held and assets to be received in fixed or determinable amounts
of money.
Research is original and planned investigation undertaken with the prospect of gaining new
scientific or technical knowledge and understanding.
The residual value of an intangible asset is the estimated amount that an entity would
currently obtain from disposal of the asset, after deducting the estimated costs of disposal, if
the asset were already of the age and in the condition expected at the end of its useful life.
Useful life is:
(a) the period over which an asset is expected to be available for use by an entity; or
(b)
the number of production or similar units expected to be obtained from the asset by
an entity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.214
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5.4 IDENTIFICATION OF INTANGIBLE ASSETS
5.4.1 Meaning of Intangible asset
An intangible asset is an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical substance. The key
components of this definition are:
Identifiability; and
(i)
(ii)
Asset
Non-monetary asset
Identifiable
Without physical
substance
Intangible Asset
Entities frequently expend resources, or incur liabilities, on the acquisition, development,
maintenance or enhancement of intangible resources such as:
Scientific or technical knowledge
Design and implementation of new processes or systems
Licenses
Intellectual property
Market knowledge and trademarks (including brand names and publishing titles).
Common examples of items encompassed by these broad headings are:
Computer software
Patents
Copyrights
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Motion picture films
Customer lists
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.215
Mortgage servicing rights
Fishing licences
Import quotas
Franchises
Customer or supplier relationships
Customer loyalty
Market share and marketing rights.
Marketing
Related
Customer
Related
Technology
Based
Intangible
Assets
Artistic
Related
Contract
Based
Let's run through some examples of each broad category listed above:
Trade Mark
Internet
Newspaper
Mastheads
Marketing
Related
Domain
Names
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Non
Compettive
Agreements
5.216
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Customer
lists
Customer
Relationship
Customer
Related
Customer
Contracts
Non Contractual
Customer
Relationship
Musical
Works
Pictures and
Photograph
Artistic
Related
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Plays, operas
and Ballets
Magazines,
Newspapers
and other
literary works
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
Franchise
Agreements
Lease
Agreements
Customer
Based
Employment
Contracts
Operaitng and
broadcasting
Rights
Trade Secrets
Patented
Technology
Technology
Based
Computer
Software
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Databases
5.217
5.218
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Not necessarily all of the above items meet the conditions of recognizing as an Intangible Assets
within purview of this standard:
Identifiability
Control over a Resource (Asset) and
Existence of Future Economic Benefits.
Note: If an item within the scope of this Standard does not meet the definition of an intangible
asset, expenditure to acquire it or generate it internally is recognized as an expense when it is
incurred. However, if the item is acquired in a business combination, it forms part of the goodwill
recognized at the acquisition date.
Let us understand each concept one by one.
5.4.2 Identifiability
The definition of an intangible asset requires an intangible asset to be identifiable to distinguish it
from goodwill. Goodwill recognized in a business combination is an asset representing the future
economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination that are not
individually identified and separately recognized. The future economic benefits may result from
synergy between the identifiable assets acquired or from assets that, individually, do not qualify for
recognition in the financial statements.
An asset is identifiable if it either:
(a)
(b)
is separable, ie is capable of being separated or divided from the entity and sold, transferred,
licensed, rented or exchanged, either individually or together with a related contract,
identifiable asset or liability, regardless of whether the entity intends to do so; or
arises from contractual or other legal rights, regardless of whether those rights are
transferable or separable from the entity or from other rights and obligations.
Illustration 1: Identifiability
Sun Ltd. has an expertise in the consulting business. In years gone by, the Company gained a
30% market share for its services business and intends to recognize it as an intangible asset.
Evaluate whether the action taken by the company is justified.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.219
Solution
Market share does not meet the definition of intangible assets as is not identifiable i.e. it is neither
separable and nor has arisen from contractual or legal rights.
5.4.3 Asset
An asset is a resource:
*****
(a)
controlled by an entity as a result of past events; and
(b)
from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the entity.
5.4.3.1 Control
An entity controls an asset if the entity has the power to obtain the future economic benefits flowing
from the underlying resource and to restrict the access of others to those benefits. The capacity of
an entity to control the future economic benefits from an intangible asset would normally stem from
legal rights that are enforceable in a court of law.
Power to obtain the future
economic benefits from
the underlying resource
Ability to restrict the access of
others to those benefits
Control
In the absence of legal rights, it is more difficult to demonstrate control. However, legal enforceability
of a right is not a necessary a condition for control because an entity may be able to control the
future economic benefits in some other way.
Market and technical knowledge may give rise to future economic benefits. An entity controls those
benefits if, for example, the knowledge is protected by legal rights such as copyrights, a restraint of
trade agreement (where permitted) or by a legal duty on employees to maintain confidentiality.
Example 1
An entity may have a team of skilled staff and may be able to identify incremental staff skills leading
to future economic benefits from training. The entity may also expect that the staff will continue to
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.220
FINANCIAL REPORTING
make their skills available to the entity. However, an entity usually has insufficient control over the
expected future economic benefits arising from a team of skilled staff and from training for these
items to meet the definition of an intangible asset.
For a similar reason, specific management or technical talent is unlikely to meet the definition of an
intangible asset, unless it is protected by legal rights to use it and to obtain the future economic
benefits expected from it, and it also meets the other parts of the definition.
An entity may have a portfolio of customers or a market share and expect that, because of its efforts
in building customer relationships and loyalty, the customers will continue to trade with the entity.
However, in the absence of legal rights to protect, or other ways to control, the relationships with
customers or the loyalty of the customers to the entity, the entity usually has insufficient control over
the expected economic benefits from customer relationships and loyalty for such items (e.g. portfolio
of customers, market shares, customer relationships and customer loyalty) to meet the definition of
intangible assets. In the absence of legal rights to protect customer relationships, exchange
transactions for the same or similar non-contractual customer relationships (other than as part of a
business combination) provide evidence that the entity is nonetheless able to control the expected
future economic benefits flowing from the customer relationships. Because such exchange
transactions also provide evidence that the customer relationships are separable, those customer
relationships meet the definition of an intangible asset.
Illustration 2: Control
Company XYZ Ltd. has provided training to its staff on various new topics like GST, Ind AS etc.
to ensure the compliance as per the required law. Discuss whether the company can recognize
such cost of staff training as intangible asset.
Solution
It is clear that the company will obtain the economic benefits from the work performed by the staff
as it increases their efficiency. But it does not have control over them because staff could choose
to resign the company at any time.
Hence the company lacks the ability to restrict the access of others to those benefits. Therefore,
the staff training cost does not meet the definition of an intangible asset.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.221
5.4.3.2 Future economic benefits
The future economic benefits flowing from an intangible asset may include:
(a)
Revenue from the sale of products or services;
(b)
Cost savings; or
(c)
Other benefits resulting from the use of the asset by the entity.
For example: The use of intellectual property in a production process may reduce future production
costs rather than increase future revenues.
Illustration 3: Identifiability of Intangible assets
Pluto Ltd. intends to open a new retail store in a new location in the next few weeks. Pluto Ltd.
has spent a substantial sum on a series of television advertisements to promote this new store.
The Company has paid an amount of  8,00,000 for advertisements before 31st March, 20X1.
7,00,000 of this sum relates to advertisements shown before 31st March, 20X1 and  1,00,000
to advertisements shown in April, 20X1. Since 31st March, 20X1, the Company has paid for further
advertisements costing ₹4,00,000.
Pluto Ltd. is of view that such costs can be carried forward as intangible assets. Since market
research indicates that this new store is likely to be highly successful.
Analyse the treatment of the above costs in the financial statements for the year ended
31st March, 20X1.
Solution
Under Ind AS 38 - Intangible Assets intangible assets can only be recognized if they are
identifiable and have a cost which can be reliably measured.
These criteria are very difficult to satisfy for internally developed intangibles.
For these reasons, Ind AS 38 specifically prohibits recognizing advertising expenditure as an
intangible asset. The issue of how successful the store is likely to be does not affect this prohibition.
Therefore, such costs should be recognized as expenses.
However, the costs would be recognized on accrual basis. Therefore, of the advertisements paid
for before 31st March, 20X1,  7,00,000 would be recognized as an expense and  1,00,000 as a
pre-payment in the year ended 31st March, 20X1. The cost of advertisements amounting
4,00,000 paid for since 31st March, 20X1 would be charged as expenses in the year ended
31st March, 20X2. Hence, in toto, prepayment of  5,00,000 ( 1,00,000+  4,00,000_ in the year
20X0-20X1 to be recognized as expenses in the year 20X1-20X2
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.222
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5.5 RECOGNITION OF INTANGIBLE ASSET
5.5.1 Recognition of Intangible assets - general principles
Provided that an item meets the definition of an intangible asset, it should be recognized in the
financial statements if, and only if:
(a)
(b)
it is probable that the expected future economic benefits that are attributable to the asset will
flow to the entity; and
the cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
Meet the definition
of intangible asset
Cost can be
measured
reliably
Probable that future
economic benefits will
flow to entity
Intangible Asset -Recognition Criteria
This requirement applies to:
(a) costs incurred initially to acquire or internally generate an intangible asset; and
(b) those incurred subsequently to add to, replace part of, or service it.
An entity should assess the probability of expected future economic benefits using reasonable
and supportable assumptions that represent management's best estimate of the set of
economic conditions that will exist over the useful life of the asset.
The nature of intangible assets is such that, in many cases, there are no additions to such an
asset or replacements of part of it. Accordingly, most subsequent expenditures are likely to
maintain the expected future economic benefits embodied in an existing intangible asset
rather than meet the definition of an intangible asset and the recognition criteria in this
Standard.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.223
In addition, it is often difficult to attribute subsequent expenditure directly to a particular
intangible asset rather than to the business as a whole. Therefore, only rarely will subsequent
expenditure - expenditure incurred after the initial recognition of an acquired intangible asset
or after completion of an internally generated intangible asset - be recognized in the carrying
amount of an asset.
Subsequent expenditure on brands, mastheads, publishing titles, customer lists and items
similar in substance (whether externally acquired or internally generated) is always
recognized in profit or loss as incurred. This is because such expenditure cannot be
distinguished from expenditure to develop the business as a whole.
5.6 MEASUREMENT OF INTANGIBLE ASSET
An intangible asset should be measured initially at cost.
Intangible assets may be acquired or can be self-generated. The below diagram reflects the method
and mode by which Intangible assets may arise:
Exchange of
assets
Internally
generated
intangible
Separate
Acquisition
Intangible
Asset
may arise
from
Part of a
Business
combination
Government
Grant
assets
Internally
generated
goodwill
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.224
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5.6.1 Separate acquisition
5.6.1.1 Recognition criteria for intangible assets acquired separately
Generally, the price an entity pays to acquire separately an intangible asset will reflect expectations
about the probability that the expected future economic benefits associated with asset will flow to
the entity. In other words, the entity expects there to be an inflow of economic benefits, even if there
is uncertainty about the timing or the amount of the inflow.
Therefore, the probability recognition criterion specified above is always considered to be satisfied
for separately acquired intangible assets.
In addition, the cost of a separately acquired intangible asset can usually be measured reliably. This
is particularly so when the purchase consideration is in the form of cash or other monetary assets.
5.6.1.2 Measurement of cost for intangible assets acquired separately
The cost of a separately acquired intangible asset comprises:
(a)
(b)
its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase taxes, after
deducting trade discounts and rebates; and
any directly attributable cost of preparing the asset for its intended use.
Cost includes
Purchase price including
import duties and non -
refundable purchase taxes
Examples of directly attributable costs are:
Directly attributable Cost of preparing the asset
for its intended use.
(Cost of Employee Benefits, Professional and
Legal Fees Cost of Testing)
Employee benefits cost (as defined in Ind AS 19) arising directly from bringing the asset to its working
condition
Professional Fees arising directly from bringing the asset to its working condition
Costs of testing - whether the asset is working properly.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.225
Examples of expenditures that are not part of the cost of an intangible asset are:
Costs of introducing a
new product or service
(including cost of
advertising and
promotional activities)
Costs of conducting
business in a new
location or with a new
class of customer
(including costs of staff
training)
Administrative and
other general
overhead costs
Deferred Consideration
If payment for an intangible asset is deferred beyond normal credit terms, then cost of such
Intangible asset is the cash price equivalent. The difference between this amount and the total
payments is recognized as interest expense over the period of credit unless it is capitalised in
accordance with Ind AS 23, Borrowing Costs.
Cessation of capitalisation
Recognition of costs in the carrying amount of an intangible asset ceases when the asset is in the
condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
For example, the following costs are not included in the carrying amount of an intangible asset:
(a)
costs incurred in using or redeploying an intangible asset;
(b)
(c)
costs incurred while an asset capable of operating in the manner intended by management
has yet to be brought into use; and
initial operating losses, such as those incurred while demand for the asset's output builds up.
Example 2 - Separate Acquisition
Jupiter Ltd acquires new energy efficient technology that will significantly reduce its energy
costs for manufacturing.
Cost of new solar technology
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Costs incurred
include ( )
10,00,000
Cost to be
capitalised as per
Ind AS 38 ( )
10,00,000
5.226
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 4: Separate Acquisition
Venus India Private Ltd. acquired a software for its internal use costing ₹10,00,000. The amount
payable for the software was 6,00,000 immediately and  4,00,000 in one year time. The other
expenditure incurred were:
Purchase tax :  1,00,000
Entry Tax : 10% (recoverable later from tax department)
Legal fees: 87,000
Consultancy fees for implementation : 1,20,000
Cost of capital of the company is 10%.
Calculate the cost of the software on initial recognition using the principles of Ind AS 38 Intangible
Assets.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.227
5.6.2 Acquisition as part of a business combination
5.6.2.1 Recognition criteria for intangible assets acquired as part of a business
combination
In accordance with Ind AS 103, Business Combinations, if an intangible asset is acquired in
a business combination, the cost of that intangible asset is its fair value at the acquisition
date. The fair value of an intangible asset will reflect market participants' expectations at the
acquisition date about the probability that the expected future economic benefits embodied
in the asset will flow to the entity.
In other words, the entity expects there to be an inflow of economic benefits, even if there is
uncertainty about the timing or the amount of the inflow. Therefore, the probability recognition
criterion is always considered to be satisfied for intangible assets acquired in business
combinations.
An acquirer recognizes at the acquisition date, separately from goodwill, an intangible asset
of the acquiree, irrespective of whether the asset had been recognized by the acquiree before
the business combination.
This means that the acquirer recognizes as an asset separately from goodwill an in-process
research and development project of the acquiree if the project meets the definition of an
intangible asset. An acquiree's in-process research and development project meets the
definition of an intangible asset when it:
(a) meets the definition of an asset; and
(b) is identifiable, ie is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights.
Measuring fair value
If an intangible asset acquired in a business combination is separable or arises from
contractual or other legal rights, sufficient information exists to measure reliably the fair value
of the asset.
When, for the estimates used to measure an intangible asset's fair value, there is a range of
possible outcomes with different probabilities that uncertainty enters into the measurement
of the asset's fair value.
An intangible asset acquired in a business combination might be separable, but only together
with a related contract, identifiable asset or liability. In such cases, the acquirer recognizes
the intangible asset separately from goodwill, but together with the related item.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.228
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The acquirer may recognize a group of complementary intangible assets as a single asset
provided the individual assets have similar useful lives. For example, the terms 'brand' and
'brand name' are often used as synonym for trademarks and other marks.
Illustration 5: Business Combination
On 31st March, 20X1, Earth India Ltd. paid 50,00,000 for a 100% interest in Sun India Ltd. At
that date Sun Ltd.'s net assets had a fair value of ₹30,00,000. In addition, Sun Ltd. also held the
following rights:
•
•
Trademark named "GRAND" - valued at 1,80,000 using a discounted cash flow
technique.
Sole distribution rights to an electronic product; future cash flows from which are estimated
to be 1,50,000 per annum for the next 6 years.
10% is considered an appropriate discount rate.
The 6-year, 10% annuity factor is 4.36.
Calculate goodwill and other intangible assets arising on acquisition.
Solution
*****
5.6.3 Acquisition by way of a government grant
An intangible asset may be acquired free of charge, or for nominal consideration, by way of a
government grant. This may happen when a government transfers or allocates to an entity,
intangible assets such as airport landing rights, licences to operate radio or television stations,
import licences or quotas or rights to access other restricted resources.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.229
In accordance with Ind AS 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government
Assistance, an entity should recognize both the intangible asset and the grant initially at fair value.
If an entity chooses not to recognize the asset initially at fair value, the entity recognizes the asset
initially at a nominal amount (the other treatment permitted by Ind AS 20) plus any expenditure that
is directly attributable to preparing the asset for its intended use.
5.6.4 Exchange of assets
One or more intangible assets may be acquired in exchange for a non-monetary asset or assets, or
a combination of monetary and non-monetary assets. The cost of such an intangible asset is
measured at fair value (even if an entity cannot immediately derecognize the asset given up) unless
either:
(a)
the exchange transaction lacks commercial substance; or
(b)
the fair value of neither the asset received nor the asset given up is reliably measurable.
If the acquired asset is not measured at fair value, its cost is measured at the carrying amount
of the asset given up.
An entity determines whether an exchange transaction has commercial substance by
considering the extent to which its future cash flows are expected to change as a result of the
transaction. An exchange transaction has commercial substance if:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the configuration (ie risk, timing and amount) of the cash flows of the asset received
differs from the configuration of the cash flows of the asset transferred; or
the entity-specific value of the portion of the entity's operations affected by the
transaction changes as a result of the exchange; and
the difference in (a) or (b) is significant relative to the fair value of the assets
exchanged.
No intangible asset can be recognized unless its cost can be measured reliably. If an entity
is able to measure reliably the fair value of either the asset received or the asset given up,
then the fair value of the asset given up is used to measure cost. However, if the fair value
of the asset received is more clearly evident, then fair value of the asset received is taken up
as cost.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.230
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The fair value of an intangible asset is reliably measurable if:
(a)
(b)
the variability in the range of reasonable fair value measurements is not significant for
that asset; or
the probabilities of the various estimates within the range can be reasonably assessed
and used when measuring fair value.
Illustration 6: Exchange of Asset
Sun Ltd. acquired a software from Earth Ltd. in exchange for a telecommunication license. The
telecommunication license is carried at 5,00,000 in the books of Sun Ltd. The Software is
carried at 10,000 in the books of the Earth Ltd. which is not the fair value.
Pass journal entries in the following situations in the books of Sun Ltd. and Earth Ltd.:
1) Fair value of software is 5,20,000 and fair value of telecommunication license is
5,00,000.
2)
3)
Fair value of software is not measurable. However, similar telecommunication license is
transacted by another company at 4,90,000.
Neither fair value of software nor telecommunication license could be reliably measured.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.231
5.6.5 Internally generated goodwill
This standard prohibits the recognition of internally generated goodwill as an asset.
Internally generated goodwill is not recognized as an asset because it is not an identifiable resource
(i.e. it is not separable, nor does it arise from contractual or other legal rights) controlled by the entity
that can be measured reliably at cost.
In some cases, expenditure is incurred to generate future economic benefits, but it does not result
in the creation of an intangible asset that meets the recognition criteria in this Standard. Such
expenditure is often described as contributing to internally generated goodwill.
Differences between the fair value of an entity and the carrying amount of its identifiable net assets
at any time may capture a range of factors that affect the fair value of the entity. However, such
differences do not represent the cost of intangible assets controlled by the entity.
5.6.6 Internally generated intangible assets
It is sometimes difficult to assess whether an internally generated intangible asset qualifies
for recognition because of difficulty in:
(a)
(b)
identifying whether and when there is an identifiable asset that will generate expected
future economic benefits; and
determining the cost of the asset reliably.
Therefore, in addition to complying with the general requirements for the recognition and
initial measurement of an intangible asset, this standard includes additional recognition
criteria for internally generated intangible assets which expand on the general recognition
criteria.
To assess whether an internally generated intangible asset meets the criteria for recognition,
an entity classifies the generation of the asset into:
(a)
a research phase; and
(b)
a development phase.
If an entity cannot distinguish the research phase from the development phase of an internal
project to create an intangible asset, the entity treats the expenditure on that project as if it
were incurred in the research phase only.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.232
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Items that should not be recognized as internally generated intangible assets
This standard prohibits the recognition of internally generated goodwill as an asset. Some other
internally generated items that are prohibited to be recognized as intangible assets are brands,
mastheads, publishing titles, customer lists and items similar in substance shall not be recognized
as intangible assets.
Research phase
Research is original and planned investigation undertaken with the prospect of gaining new
scientific or technical knowledge and understanding.
No intangible asset arising from research (or from the research phase of an internal project)
should be recognized. Expenditure on research (or on the research phase of an internal
project) should be recognized as an expense when it is incurred.
In the research phase of an internal project, an entity cannot demonstrate that an intangible
asset exists that will generate probable future economic benefits. Therefore, this expenditure
is recognized as an expense when it is incurred.
Examples of research activities are:
(a)
activities aimed at obtaining new knowledge;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the search for, evaluation and final selection of, applications of research findings or
other knowledge;
the search for alternatives for materials, devices, products, processes, systems or
services; and
the formulation, design, evaluation and final selection of possible alternatives for new
or improved materials, devices, products, processes, systems or services.
Development Phase
Development is the application of research findings or other knowledge to a plan or design for the
production of new or substantially improved materials, devices, products, processes, systems or
services before the start of commercial production or use.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.233
Examples of development activities are:
Design, construction and testing of pre-production or pre-use prototypes and
models;
Design of tools, jigs, moulds and dies involving new technology
Design, construction and operation of a pilot plant that is not of a scale
economically feasible for commercial production
Design, construction and testing of a chosen alternative for new or improved
materials, devices, products, processes, systems or services
An intangible asset arising from development (or from the development phase of an internal
project) should be recognized if, and only if, an entity can demonstrate all of the following:
Technical feasibility of completion of Intangible asset to make it available for use or sale
Intention to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it
Ability to use or sell the intangible asset.
How the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits. Among other
things, the entity can demonstrate the existence of a market for the output of the intangible
asset or the intangible asset itself or, if it is to be used internally, the usefulness of the
intangible asset.
Adequate resources (like technical, financial or others) to complete the development.
Ability to measure reliably the expenditure attributable to the intangible asset during its
development.
In the development phase of an internal project, an entity can, in some instances, identify an
intangible asset and demonstrate that the asset will generate probable future economic
benefits. This is because the development phase of a project is further advanced than the
research phase.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.234
FINANCIAL REPORTING
To demonstrate how an intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits, an
entity assesses the future economic benefits to be received from the asset using the
principles in Ind AS 36, Impairment of Assets. If the asset will generate economic benefits
only in combination with other assets, the entity applies the concept of cash-generating units
in Ind AS 36.
Availability of resources to complete, use and obtain the benefits from an intangible asset
can be demonstrated by, for example, a business plan showing the technical, financial and
other resources needed and the entity's ability to secure those resources. In some cases, an
entity demonstrates the availability of external finance by obtaining a lender's indication of its
willingness to fund the plan.
An entity's costing systems can often measure reliably the cost of generating an intangible
asset internally, such as salary and other expenditure incurred in securing copyrights or
licences or developing computer software.
Research is mainly
acquisition of Knowledge
Development is application
of Knowledge
Cost of an internally generated asset
The cost of an internally generated intangible asset for the purpose of initial measurement at
recognition is the sum of expenditure incurred from the date when the intangible asset first meets
the recognition criteria including the additional criteria specified above.
Cost-Inclusions
The cost of an internally generated intangible asset comprises all directly attributable costs
necessary to create, produce, and prepare the asset to be capable of operating in the manner
intended by management.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.235
Examples of directly attributable costs are:
Costs of materials and services used or consumed in generating the intangible asset
Costs of employee benefits (as defined in Ind AS 19) arising from the generation of the
intangible asset
Fees to register a legal right
Amortisation of patents and licences that are used to generate the intangible asset
The specific guidance is given for borrowing costs to be capitalized as part of the cost of a self-
generated intangible asset.
This standard prohibits reinstatement of expenditure previously recognized as an expense.
Cost Exclusions
The following are not components of the cost of an internally generated intangible asset:
(a)
(b)
(c)
selling, administrative and other general overhead expenditure unless this expenditure can
be directly attributed to preparing the asset for use;
identified inefficiencies and initial operating losses incurred before the asset achieves
planned performance; and
expenditure on training staff to operate the asset.
Illustration 7
Venus Ltd. is preparing its accounts for the year ended 31st March, 20X2 and is unsure how to
treat the following items.
1. Company has completed a big marketing and advertising campaign costing 2,40,000. The
finance director had authorised this campaign on the basis that it would create  5,00,000 of
additional profits over the next three years.
2.
A new product was developed during the year. The expenditure aggregated ₹1,50,000 of
which
1,00,000 was incurred prior to 30th September, 20X1, the date on which it became
clear that the product was technically viable. The new product will be launched in the next
four months and its recoverable amount is estimated at 70,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.236
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3. Staff participated in a training programme which cost the company 3,00,000. The training
organization had made a presentation to the directors of Baxter outlining that incremental
profits to the business over the next twelve months would be  5,00,000.
What amounts should appear as assets in Venus Ltd.'s balance sheet as at 31st March, 20X2?
Solution
The treatment in Venus Ltd.'s balance sheet as at 31st March, 20X2 will be as follows:
1.
2.
3.
Marketing and advertising campaign: no asset will be recognized because it is not
possible to identify future economic benefits that are attributable only to this campaign. All
of the expenditure should be expensed in the statement of profit and loss account.
New product: development expenditure appearing in the statement of financial position
will be valued at 50,000. The expenditure prior to the date on which the product becomes
technically feasible is recognized in the statement of profit and loss account as an expense.
Training programme: no intangible asset will be recognized, because staff are not under
the control of Venus Ltd. and when staff leave the benefits of the training, whatever they
may be, also leave.
Illustration 8: Development Phase
*****
Expenditure on a new production process in 20X1-20X2:
The production process met the intangible asset recognition criteria for development on
1st January, 20X2. The amount estimated to be recoverable from the process is  1,000.
Expenditure incurred for development of the process in financial year 20X2-20X3 is  6,000. Asset
was brought into use on 31st March, 20X3 and is expected to be useful for 6 years.
What is the carrying amount of the intangible asset at 31st March, 20X2 and 31st March, 20X3.
Also determine the charge to profit or loss for 20X1-20X2?
At 31st March, 20X4, the amount estimated to be recoverable from the process is ₹5,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.237
Determine the carrying amount of the intangible asset at 31st March, 20X4 and the charge to profit
or loss for 20X3-20X4 on account of impairment loss.
Solution
5) Carrying Amount of Intangible Asset on 31st March, 20X4
Value of intangible asset will be recoverable amount i.e.  5,000
*****
5.7. RECOGNITION OF AN EXPENSE
Expenditure on an intangible item should be recognized as an expense when it is incurred
unless:
(a)
it forms part of the cost of an intangible asset that meets the recognition criteria; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.238
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b) the item is acquired in a business combination and cannot be recognized as an
intangible asset. In such case, it forms part of the amount recognized as goodwill at
the acquisition date.
This standard states that the following types of expenditure should always be recognized as
an expense:
(a)
(b)
expenditure on research (except when it is acquired as part of a business
combination);
expenditure on start-up activities (ie start-up costs), unless this expenditure is included
in the cost of an item of property, plant and equipment in accordance with Ind AS 16.
Start-up costs may consist of:
(i)
establishment costs such as legal and secretarial costs incurred in establishing
a legal entity;
expenditure to open a new facility or business (ie pre-opening costs);
(ii)
(iii)
(c)
expenditure on training activities;
(d)
expenditures for starting new operations or launching new products or
processes (ie pre-operating costs);
expenditure on advertising and promotional activities (including mail order
catalogues); and
(e)
expenditure on relocating or reorganizing part or all of an entity.
More generally, if expenditure does not give rise to an intangible asset:
(a) for the supply of goods, an expense is recognized when the entity has a right to access
those goods. An entity has a right to access goods when it owns them. Similarly, it
has a right to access goods when they have been constructed by a supplier in
accordance with the terms of a supply contract and the entity could demand delivery
of them in return for payment.
(b)
for a supply of services, the entity recognizes the expenditure as an expense when it
receives the services. Services are received when they are performed by a supplier
in accordance with a contract to deliver them to the entity and not when the entity uses
them to deliver another service, for example, to deliver an advertisement to customers.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.239
This does not preclude an entity from recognizing a prepayment as an asset when payment
for goods has been made in advance of the entity obtaining a right to access those goods or
in advance of the entity receiving those services.
Expenditure on an intangible item that was initially recognized as an expense should not be
recognized as part of the cost of an intangible asset at a later date.
5.8 MEASUREMENT AFTER RECOGNITION
An entity should choose either the cost model or the revaluation model as its accounting policy.
5.8.1 Cost model
Cost Model
Revaluation Model
After initial recognition, an intangible asset is carried at its cost less any accumulated amortisation
and any accumulated impairment losses.
Cost
Accumulated
amortisation
Accumulated
impairment
losses
Carrying
Amount
5.8.2 Revaluation model
After initial recognition, an intangible asset is carried at a revalued amount, being its fair value at
the date of the revaluation less any subsequent accumulated amortisation and any subsequent
accumulated impairment losses.
FV at the
Subsequent
Subsequent
accumulated
date of
accumulated
Carrying
revaluation
Amortisation
Impairment
Amount
loss
For the purpose of revaluations under this Standard, fair value is measured by reference to
an active market.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.240
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The revaluation model does not allow:
(a)
(b)
the revaluation of intangible assets that have not previously been recognized as
assets; or
the initial recognition of intangible assets at amounts other than cost.
The revaluation model is applied after an asset has been initially recognized at cost.
However, if only part of the cost of an intangible asset is recognized as an asset because the
asset did not meet the criteria for recognition until part of the way through the process, the
revaluation model may be applied to the whole of that asset.
Also, the revaluation model may be applied to an intangible asset that was received by way
of a Government grant and recognized at a nominal amount.
Frequency of revaluations
Revaluations should be made with such regularity that at the end of the reporting period the
carrying amount of the asset does not differ materially from its fair value.
The frequency of revaluations depends on the volatility of the fair values of the intangible
assets being revalued. If the fair value of a revalued asset differs materially from its carrying
amount, a further revaluation is necessary.
Some intangible assets may experience significant and volatile movements in fair value, thus
necessitating annual revaluation. Such frequent revaluations are unnecessary for intangible
assets with only insignificant movements in fair value.
Scope of revaluations
If an intangible asset is accounted for using the revaluation model, all the other assets in its
class should also be accounted for using the same model, unless there is no active market
for those assets.
If an intangible asset in a class of revalued intangible assets cannot be revalued because
there is no active market for this asset, the asset is carried at its cost less any accumulated
amortisation and impairment losses.
A class of intangible assets is a grouping of assets of a similar nature and use in an entity's
operations.
If the fair value of a revalued intangible asset can no longer be measured by reference to an
active market, the carrying amount of the asset is its revalued amount at the date of the last
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.241
revaluation by reference to the active market less any subsequent accumulated amortisation
and any subsequent accumulated impairment losses.
The fact that an active market no longer exists for a revalued intangible asset may indicate
that the asset may be impaired and that it needs to be tested in accordance with Ind AS 36.
If the fair value of the asset can be measured by reference to an active market at a
subsequent measurement date, the revaluation model is applied from that date.
Accumulated amortisation at the date of revaluation
When an intangible asset is revalued, the carrying amount of that asset is adjusted to the
revalued amount. At the date of the revaluation, the asset is treated in one of the following
ways:
(a) the gross carrying amount is adjusted in a manner that is consistent with the
revaluation of the carrying amount of the asset. For example, the gross carrying
amount may be restated by reference to observable market data or it may be restated
proportionately to the change in the carrying amount. The accumulated amortisation
at the date of the revaluation is adjusted to equal the difference between the gross
carrying amount and the carrying amount of the asset after taking into account
accumulated impairment losses; or
(b)
the accumulated amortisation is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the
asset.
Treatment of surplus or deficit arising on revaluation
If an intangible asset's carrying amount is increased as a result of a revaluation, the increase
shall be recognized in other comprehensive income and accumulated in equity under the
heading of revaluation surplus.
However, the increase shall be recognized in profit or loss to the extent that it reverses a
revaluation decrease of the same asset previously recognized in profit or loss.
If an intangible asset's carrying amount is decreased as a result of a revaluation, the decrease
shall be recognized in profit or loss.
However, the decrease shall be recognized in other comprehensive income to the extent of
any credit balance in the revaluation surplus in respect of that asset. The decrease
recognized in other comprehensive income reduces the amount accumulated in equity under
the heading of revaluation surplus.
The cumulative revaluation surplus included in equity may be transferred directly to retained
earnings when the surplus is realised. The whole surplus may be realised on the retirement
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.242
FINANCIAL REPORTING
or disposal of the asset. Some realisation of the revaluation surplus may occur, however,
through the use of the intangible asset.
The amount of the surplus realised is the difference between amortisation based on the
revalued carrying amount of the asset and amortisation that would have been recognized
based on the asset's historical cost. The transfer from revaluation surplus to retained
earnings is not made through profit or loss.
Treatment of Revaluation Gain or Loss
First time revaluation
Subsequent revaluation
Increase in the
carrying amount
(CA) of the
revalued asset
Recognize
the
revaluation
gain in OCI
Decrease in the
carrying amount
(CA) of the
revalued asset
Recognize
the
revaluation
loss in P & L
Yes
Increase in CA of
the revalued asset
Was there a
previous
increase in CA
of the revalued
asset?
Recognize
No
the
revaluation gain in P
Yes
Decrease in CA of
the revalued asset
Was there a
previous
decrease in CA
of the revalued
asset?
No
Recognize the
revaluation loss in
Recognize
the
revaluation
Recognize
& L to the extent that
OCI to the extent
the
it
reverses a
revaluation
revaluation
gain in OCI
loss in P & L
of any credit
balance existing in
the revaluation
same
decrease of the
previously
recognized in P&L
asset
surplus in respect
of that asset.
Remaining decrease to
Remaining increase to be
be recognized in P & L
recognized in OCI
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.243
Illustration 9: Revaluation Model
1.
Saturn Ltd. acquired an intangible asset on 31st March, 20X1 for 1,00,000. The asset
was revalued at 1,20,000 on 31st March, 20X2 and 85,000 on 31st March, 20X3.
2.
Jupiter Ltd. acquired an intangible asset on 31st March, 20X1 for 1,00,000. The asset
was revalued at 85,000 on 31st March, 20X2 and at 1,05,000 on 31st March, 20X3.
For both the companies, the year ends on 31st March, and they both use the revaluation model.
Recommend how each of these transactions should be dealt with in the financial statements.
Discuss the treatment for revaluation of intangible asset. Ignore computation of amortization on
them for ease of understanding.
Solution
Saturn Ltd.
 20,000 revaluation increase on 31st March, 20X2 should be credited to the revaluation reserve and
recognized in other comprehensive income. 20,000 of the revaluation decrease on
31st March, 20X3 should be debited to revaluation reserve and remaining 15,000 should be
recognized as an expense.
Jupiter Ltd.
15,000 revaluation decrease on 31st March, 20X2 should be recognized as an expense in the
Statement of Profit and loss.  15,000 out of the 20,000 increase on 31st March, 20X3 should be
recognized as income. The remaining 5,000 should be credited to revaluation reserve and
recognized in other comprehensive income.
Note: The above amount will be different if amortization of intangible asset is taken into
consideration.
*****
5.9 USEFUL LIFE
The accounting for an intangible asset is based on its useful life. An intangible asset with a
finite useful life is amortised, and an intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not
amortised and tested for impairment.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.244
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Finite or indefinite useful life
Entities are required to assess whether the useful life of an intangible asset is finite or
indefinite and, if finite, the length of, or number of production or similar units constituting, that
useful life.
An intangible asset should be regarded by the entity as having an indefinite useful life when,
based on an analysis of all of the relevant factors, there is no foreseeable limit to the period
over which the asset is expected to generate net cash inflows for the entity.
Factors for consideration in determining useful life
Many factors are considered in determining the useful life of an intangible asset, including:
Expected usage of the asset by the entity
Product life cycles for the asset and public information on estimates of useful life of
similiar asset used in a similiar way
Technical, technological, commercial or other type of obsolescence
Industrial stability in which the asset operate and changes in market demand for
the products or services from the output
Expected actions by competitors or potential competitors
Period of control over the asset and legal or similar limits on the use of assets, like
expiry dates of related leases
Whether the useful life is dependent on the useful lives of other assets of the entity
The useful life of an intangible asset reflects only that level of future maintenance expenditure
required to maintain the asset at its standard of performance assessed at the time of
estimating the asset's useful life, and the entity's ability and intention to reach such a level.
A conclusion that the useful life of an intangible asset is indefinite should not depend on
planned future expenditure in excess of that required to maintain the asset at that standard
of performance.
This standard notes that, given the history of rapid changes in technology, computer software
and many other intangible assets are susceptible to technological obsolescence. Therefore,
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.245
it will often be the case that their useful life is short. Expected future reductions in the selling
price of an item that was produced using an intangible asset could indicate the expectation
of technological or commercial obsolescence of the asset, which, in turn, might reflect a
reduction of the future economic benefits embodied in the asset.
The useful life of an intangible asset may be very long or even indefinite. Uncertainty justifies
estimating the useful life of an intangible asset on a prudent basis, but it does not justify
choosing a life that is unrealistically short.
Intangible asset arising from contractual or other legal rights
The useful life of an intangible asset that arises from contractual or other legal rights shall
not exceed the period of the contractual or other legal rights but may be shorter depending
on the period over which the entity expects to use the asset.
If the contractual or other legal rights are conveyed for a limited term that can be renewed,
the useful life of the intangible asset shall include the renewal period(s) only if there is
evidence to support renewal by the entity without significant cost.
Existence of the following factors, among others, indicates that an entity would be able to
renew the contractual or other legal rights without significant cost:
(a)
(b)
(c)
there is evidence, possibly based on experience, that the contractual or other legal
rights will be renewed. If renewal is contingent upon the consent of a third party, this
includes evidence that the third party will give its consent;
there is evidence that any conditions necessary to obtain renewal will be satisfied; and
the cost to the entity of renewal is not significant when compared with the future
economic benefits expected to flow to the entity from renewal.
If the cost of renewal is significant when compared with the future economic benefits expected
to flow to the entity from renewal, the 'renewal' cost represents, in substance, the cost to
acquire a new intangible asset at the renewal date.
The useful life of a reacquired right recognized as an intangible asset in a business
combination is the remaining contractual period of the contract in which the right was granted
and shall not include renewal periods.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.246
Finite Life
FINANCIAL REPORTING
limited period
of benefit to
entity.
Amortisation
required
Useful life of an
Intangible asset
Indefinite Life
No foreseeable limit to
the period over which
asset is expected to
generate net cash
inflows to the entity
Amortisation
Not required
5.10 INTANGIBLE ASSETS WITH FINITE USEFUL LIVES
5.10.1 Depreciable amount to be amortised over the asset's useful life
The depreciable amount of an intangible asset with a finite useful life is allocated on a
systematic basis over its useful life. The depreciable amount of an asset is defined as the
cost of an asset, or other amount substituted for cost, less its residual value.
Amortisation is usually recognized in profit or loss. However, sometimes the future economic
benefits embodied in an asset are absorbed in producing other assets. In this case, the
amortisation charge constitutes part of the cost of the other asset and is included in its
carrying amount. For example, the amortisation of intangible assets used in a production
process is included in the carrying amount of inventories (see Ind AS 2, Inventories).
5.10.2 Residual Value
The residual value of an intangible asset with a finite useful life should be assumed to be zero
unless:
(a)
(b)
there is a commitment by a third party to purchase the asset at the end of its useful
life; or
there is an active market (as defined in Ind AS 113) for the asset and:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.247
(i)
residual value can be determined by reference to that market; and
(ii)
it is probable that such a market will exist at the end of the asset's useful life.
Residual Value is assumed
to be zero unless there is
Commitment by a third party to purchase at end
of useful life i.e. have a guaranteed residual value
An active market.
The residual value is reviewed at least at each financial year-end. An estimate of an asset's
residual value is based on the amount recoverable from disposal using prices prevailing at
the date of the estimate for the sale of a similar asset that has reached the end of its useful
life and has operated under conditions similar to those in which the asset will be used.
A change in the asset's residual value is accounted for as a change in an accounting estimate
in accordance with Ind AS 8, Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and
Errors.
The residual value of an intangible asset may increase to an amount equal to or greater than
the asset's carrying amount. If it does, the asset's amortisation charge is zero unless and
until its residual value subsequently decreases to an amount below the asset's carrying
amount.
5.10.3 Amortisation period
Meaning
Amortisation
Begin
Cease
Allocation
of
the
depreciable amount of an
intangible asset with a finite
useful life on a systematic
basis over its useful life.
When the asset is
available for use.
Earlier of the date
-when asset is classified
as held for sale
-when asset
derecognized
is
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.248
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Commencement of amortisation
Amortisation commences from the date when the asset is available for use, i.e. when it is in the
location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by
management.
Cessation of amortisation
Amortisation ceases at the earlier of:
(a)
(b)
the date that the asset is classified as held for sale (or included in a disposal group that is
classified as held for sale) in accordance with Ind AS 105; and
the date that the asset is derecognized.
Amortisation of an intangible asset with a finite useful life does not cease when the intangible asset
is no longer used, unless the asset has been fully depreciated or is classified as held for sale (or
included in a disposal group that is classified as held for sale) in accordance with
Ind AS 105.
Review of amortisation period
The amortisation period for an intangible asset with a finite useful life should be reviewed at least at
each financial year-end. If the expected useful life of the asset is different from previous estimates,
the amortisation period should be changed accordingly. Such change is accounted for as a change
in accounting estimates in accordance with Ind AS 8.
5.10.4 Amortisation method
The amortisation method used should reflect the pattern in which the asset's future economic
benefits are expected to be consumed by the entity. If that pattern cannot be determined reliably,
the straight-line method should be used.
A variety of amortisation methods can be used to allocate the depreciable amount of an asset on a
systematic basis over its useful life. These methods include the straight-line method, the diminishing
balance method and the units of production method.
In choosing an appropriate amortisation method, an entity could determine the predominant limiting
factor that is inherent in the intangible asset. For example, the contract that sets out the entity's
rights over its use of an intangible asset might specify the entity's use of the intangible asset as a
predetermined number of years (i.e. time), as a number of units produced or as a fixed total amount
of revenue to be generated.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.249
Identification of such a predominant limiting factor could serve as the starting point for the
identification of the appropriate basis of amortisation, but another basis may be applied if it more
closely reflects the expected pattern of consumption of economic benefits.
The amortisation method for an intangible asset with a finite useful life should be reviewed at least
at each financial year-end. If there has been a change in the expected pattern of consumption of
the future economic benefits embodied in the asset, the amortisation method should be changed to
reflect the changed pattern. Such change is accounted for as a change in accounting estimates in
accordance with Ind AS 8.
Amortisation method based on revenue
There is a rebuttable presumption that an amortisation method that is based on the revenue
generated by an activity that includes the use of an intangible asset is inappropriate.
The revenue generated by an activity that includes the use of an intangible asset typically reflects
factors that are not directly linked to the consumption of the economic benefits embodied in the
intangible asset. For example, revenue is affected by other inputs and processes, selling activities
and changes in sales volumes and prices. The price component of revenue may be affected by
inflation, which has no bearing upon the way in which an asset is consumed.
This presumption can be overcome only in the limited circumstances:
(a)
(b)
in which the intangible asset is expressed as a measure of revenue, as described in
paragraph 98C; or
when it can be demonstrated that revenue and the consumption of the economic benefits of
the intangible asset are highly correlated.
In the circumstance in which the predominant limiting factor that is inherent in an intangible asset is
the achievement of a revenue threshold, the revenue to be generated can be an appropriate basis
for amortisation. For example, an entity could acquire a concession to explore and extract gold from
a gold mine. The expiry of the contract might be based on a fixed amount of total revenue to be
generated from the extraction (for example, a contract may allow the extraction of gold from the mine
until total cumulative revenue from the sale of gold reaches 2 billion) and not be based on time or
on the amount of gold extracted.
In another example, the right to operate a toll road could be based on a fixed total amount of revenue
to be generated from cumulative tolls charged (for example, a contract could allow operation of the
toll road until the cumulative amount of tolls generated from operating the road reaches 100 lakh).
In the case in which revenue has been established as the predominant limiting factor in the contract
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.250
FINANCIAL REPORTING
for the use of the intangible asset, the revenue that is to be generated might be an appropriate basis
for amortising the intangible asset, provided that the contract specifies a fixed total amount of
revenue to be generated on which amortisation is to be determined.
Example 3 - An acquired customer list
A direct-mail marketing company acquires a customer list and expects that it will be able to derive
benefit from the information on the list for at least one year, but no more than three years.
The customer list would be amortised over management's best estimate of its useful life, say 18
months. Although the direct-mail marketing company may intend to add customer names and
other information to the list in the future, the expected benefits of the acquired customer list relate
only to the customers on that list at the date it was acquired. The customer list also would be
reviewed for impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36, Impairment of Assets, by assessing at the
end of each reporting period whether there is any indication that the customer list may be impaired.
Example 4 - An acquired patent that expires in 15 years
The product protected by the patented technology is expected to be a source of net cash inflows
for at least 15 years. The entity has a commitment from a third party to purchase that patent in
five years for 60 per cent of the fair value of the patent at the date it was acquired, and the entity
intends to sell the patent in five years.
The patent would be amortised over its five-year useful life to the entity, with a residual value
equal to the present value of 60 per cent of the patent's fair value at the date it was acquired. It
may be noted that the estimated useful life has to be considered with reference to the entity only
though the total life of the patent is much higher i.e., 15 years. The patent would also be reviewed
for impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36 by assessing at the end of each reporting period
whether there is any indication that it may be impaired.
Example 5 - An acquired copyright that has a remaining legal life of 50 years
An analysis of consumer habits and market trends provides evidence that the copyrighted material
will generate net cash inflows for only 30 more years.
It needs to be noted that although the remaining legal life of the patent is 50 years, however the
useful life from the entity's perspective is only 30 years. The copyright would be amortised over
its 30-years estimated useful life. The copyright also would be reviewed for impairment in
accordance with Ind AS 36 by assessing at the end of each reporting period whether there is any
indication that it may be impaired.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.251
Example 6 - An acquired broadcasting licence that expires in five years
The broadcasting licence is renewable every 10 years if the entity provides at least an average
level of service to its customers and complies with the relevant legislative requirements. The
licence may be renewed indefinitely at little cost and has been renewed twice before the most
recent acquisition. The acquiring entity intends to renew the licence indefinitely and evidence
supports its ability to do so. Historically, there has been no compelling challenge to the licence
renewal. The technology used in broadcasting is not expected to be replaced by another
technology at any time in the foreseeable future. Therefore, the licence is expected to contribute
to the entity's net cash inflows indefinitely.
The broadcasting licence would be treated as having an indefinite useful life because it is expected
to contribute to the entity's net cash inflows indefinitely. Therefore, the licence would not be
amortised until its useful life is determined to be finite. The licence would be tested for impairment
in accordance with Ind AS 36 annually and whenever there is an indication that it may be impaired.
Example 7 - The broadcasting licence in Example 6
The licensing authority subsequently decides that it will no longer renew broadcasting licences,
but rather will auction the licences. At the time the licensing authority's decision is made, the
entity's broadcasting licence has three years until it expires. The entity expects that the licence
will continue to contribute to net cash inflows until the licence expires.
Because the broadcasting licence can no longer be renewed, its useful life is no longer indefinite.
Thus, the acquired licence would be amortised over its remaining three-year useful life and
immediately tested for impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36.
Example 8 - An acquired airline route authority between two European cities that expires in
three years
The route authority may be renewed every five years, and the acquiring entity intends to comply
with the applicable rules and regulations surrounding renewal. Route authority renewals are
routinely granted at a minimal cost and historically have been renewed when the airline has
complied with the applicable rules and regulations. The acquiring entity expects to provide service
indefinitely between the two cities from its hub airports and expects that the related supporting
infrastructure (airport gates, slots, and terminal facility leases) will remain in place at those airports
for as long as it has the route authority. An analysis of demand and cash flows supports those
assumptions.
Since the facts and circumstances support the acquiring entity's ability to continue providing air
service indefinitely between the two cities, the intangible asset related to the route authority is
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.252
FINANCIAL REPORTING
treated as having an indefinite useful life. Therefore, the route authority would not be amortised
until its useful life is determined to be finite. It would be tested for impairment in accordance with
Ind AS 36 annually and whenever there is an indication that it may be impaired.
Example 9 An acquired trademark used to identify and distinguish a leading consumer
product that has been a market-share leader for the past eight years
The trademark has a remaining legal life of five years but is renewable every 10 years at little
cost. The acquiring entity intends to renew the trademark continuously and evidence supports its
ability to do so. An analysis of (1) product life cycle studies, (2) market, competitive and
environmental trends, and (3) brand extension opportunities provide evidence that the
trademarked product will generate net cash inflows for the acquiring entity for an indefinite period.
The trademark would be treated as having an indefinite useful life because it is expected to
contribute to net cash inflows indefinitely. Though the remaining legal life is five years, the
possibility that it can be renewed every ten years and the entity's intention to renew the same
leads to the conclusion that the trademark has an indefinite useful life. Therefore, the trademark
would not be amortised until its useful life is determined to be finite. It would be tested for
impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36 annually and whenever there is an indication that it may
be impaired.
Example 10- A trademark acquired 10 years ago that distinguishes a leading consumer
product
The trademark was regarded as having an indefinite useful life when it was acquired because the
trademarked product was expected to generate net cash inflows indefinitely. However,
unexpected competition has recently entered the market and will reduce future sales of the
product. Management estimates that net cash inflows generated by the product will be 20 per
cent less for the foreseeable future. However, management expects that the product will continue
to generate net cash inflows indefinitely at those reduced amounts.
As a result of the projected decrease in future net cash inflows, the entity determines that the
estimated recoverable amount of the trademark is less than its carrying amount, and an
impairment loss is recognized. Since it is still regarded as having an indefinite useful life, the
trademark would continue not to be amortised but would be tested for impairment in accordance
with Ind AS 36 annually and whenever there is an indication that it may be impaired.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.253
Example 11 Trademark for a line of products that was acquired several years ago in a
business combination
At the time of the business combination the acquiree had been producing the line of products for
35 years with many new models developed under the trademark. At the acquisition date the
acquirer expected to continue producing the line, and an analysis of various economic factors
indicated there was no limit to the period the trademark would contribute to net cash inflows.
Consequently, the trademark was not amortised by the acquirer. However, management has
recently decided that production of the product line will be discontinued over the next four years.
Since the useful life of the acquired trademark is no longer regarded as indefinite, the carrying
amount of the trademark would be tested for impairment in accordance with Ind AS 36 and
amortised over its remaining four-year useful life.
5.11 INTANGIBLE ASSETS WITH INDEFINITE USEFUL
LIVES
An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life should not be amortised.
In accordance with Ind AS 36, an entity is required to test an intangible asset with an indefinite
useful life for impairment by comparing its recoverable amount with its carrying amount
(a)
(b)
annually; and
whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
The useful life of an intangible asset that is not being amortised should be reviewed each
period to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support an indefinite
useful life assessment for that asset. If they do not, the change in the useful life assessment
from indefinite to finite is accounted for as a change in an accounting estimate in accordance
with Ind AS 8.
In accordance with Ind AS 36, reassessing the useful life of an intangible asset as finite rather
than indefinite is an indicator that the asset may be impaired. As a result, the entity tests the
asset for impairment by comparing its recoverable amount, determined in accordance with
Ind AS 36, with its carrying amount, and recognizing any excess of the carrying amount over
the recoverable amount as an impairment loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.254
FINANCIAL REPORTING
If useful life is finite
Intangible Asset is
amortised based
on its useful life**
Amortisation of an
Intangible asset
Recognized in
profit or loss
If useful life is
indefinite*
Intangible asset is
not amortised
Commencement of
amortisation period
When the asset is
available for use
Cessation of
amortisation period
When the asset is
classified as held
for sale (or
included in a
disposal group
classified as held
for sale) as per Ind
AS 105
At the earlier of the date
The date that the
asset is
derecognised
Test for impairment
by comparing its
recoverable
amount with its
carrying amount
Annually
Whenever there is
an indication for
impairment
The useful life shall
be reviewed
periodically. The
change in the
useful life
assessment from
indefinite to finite
shall be accounted
for as a change in
an accounting
estimate as per
Ind AS 8
*The term 'indefinite' does not
mean 'infinite'.
**Useful life is equivalent to
the length of, or number of
production or similar units
Amortisation of an intangible
asset with a finite useful life
does not cease when the
intangible asset is no longer
used, if the asset has not been
fully depreciated or has not been
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.255
5.12 IMPAIRMENT
To determine whether an intangible asset is impaired, an entity applies Ind AS 36. That
Standard explains when and how an entity reviews the carrying amount of its assets, how it
determines the recoverable amount of an asset and when it recognizes or reverses an
impairment loss.
For an intangible asset with indefinite useful lives, an impairment review is required at least
annually.
5.13 RETIREMENTS AND DISPOSALS
An intangible asset should be derecognized:
(a) on disposal; or
(b) when no future economic benefits are expected from its use or disposal.
The disposal of an intangible asset may occur in a variety of ways (e.g. by sale, by entering
into a finance lease, or by donation).
The gain or loss arising from the derecognition of an intangible asset should be determined
as the difference between the net disposal proceeds, if any, and the carrying amount of the
asset. It is to be recognized in profit or loss when the asset is derecognized (unless
Ind AS 116 requires otherwise on a sale and leaseback). Gains should not be classified as
revenue.
If in accordance with the recognition principle an entity recognizes in the carrying amount of
an asset the cost of a replacement for part of an intangible asset, then it derecognizes the
carrying amount of the replaced part. If it is not practicable for an entity to determine the
carrying amount of the replaced part, it may use the cost of the replacement as an indication
of what the cost of the replaced part was at the time it was acquired or internally generated.
The date of disposal of an intangible asset is the date that the recipient obtains control of that
asset in accordance with the requirements for determining when a performance obligation is
satisfied as per Ind AS 115. Ind AS 116 applies to disposal by a sale and leaseback.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.256
FINANCIAL REPORTING
In the case of a reacquired right in a business combination, if the right is subsequently
reissued (sold) to a third party, the related carrying amount, if any, should be used in
determining the gain or loss on reissue.
The amount of consideration to be included in the gain or loss arising from the derecognition
of an intangible asset is determined in accordance with the requirements for determining the
transaction price (as per Ind AS 115). Subsequent changes to the estimated amount of the
consideration included in the gain or loss shall be accounted for in accordance with the
requirements for changes in the transaction price in Ind AS 115.
Retirements and disposals of Intangible assets
An intangible asset shall be
derecognized
Gain or loss = Net disposal proceeds
Carrying amount of the asset
On disposal
When no future
economic
benefits are
expected from
By sale
By entering into
finance logso
By donation
Recognized in profit or loss when the
asset is derecognized
Gains shall not be classified as revenue
1)
5.14 DISCLOSURE
Disclosure - general
An entity should disclose the following for each class of intangible assets, distinguishing between
internally generated intangible assets and other intangible assets:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.257
(a)
whether the useful lives are indefinite or finite and, if finite, the useful lives or the amortisation
rates used;
(b)
the amortisation methods used for intangible assets with finite useful lives;
(c)
the gross carrying amount and any accumulated amortisation (aggregated with accumulated
impairment losses) at the beginning and end of the period;
(d)
the line item(s) of the statement of profit and loss in which any amortisation of intangible
assets is included; and
(e)
a reconciliation of the carrying amount at the beginning and end of the period showing:
(i)
additions, indicating separately those from internal development, those acquired
separately, and those acquired through business combinations;
(ii)
assets classified as held for sale or included in a disposal group classified as held for
sale in accordance with Ind AS 105 and other disposals;
(iii)
increases or decreases during the period resulting from revaluations and from
impairment losses recognized or reversed in other comprehensive income;
(iv)
impairment losses recognized in profit or loss during the period;
(v)
impairment losses reversed in profit or loss during the period;
(vi)
any amortisation recognized during the period;
2)
3)
(vii)
(viii)
net exchange differences arising on the translation of the financial statements into the
presentation currency, and on the translation of a foreign operation into the
presentation currency of the entity; and
other changes in the carrying amount during the period.
Intangible assets having an indefinite useful life
For an intangible asset assessed as having an indefinite useful life, financial statement should
disclose the carrying amount of that asset and the reasons supporting the assessment of an
indefinite useful life. In giving these reasons, the entity shall describe the factor(s) that played
a significant role in determining that the asset has an indefinite useful life.
Intangible assets that are individually material
Financial statement should disclose a description, the carrying amount and remaining
amortisation period of any individual intangible asset that is material to the entity's financial
statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.258
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4) Intangible assets acquired by way of government grant
For intangible assets acquired by way of a government grant and initially recognized at fair
value, the financial statement should disclose:
(a)
the fair value initially recognized for these assets;
(b)
their carrying amount; and
(c)
whether they are measured after recognition under the cost model or the revaluation
model.
5)
Title restrictions and capital commitments
The financial statement should also disclose:
the existence and carrying amounts of intangible assets whose title is restricted and the
carrying amounts of intangible assets pledged as security for liabilities and the amount of
contractual commitments for the acquisition of intangible assets.
6) Intangible assets carried at revalued amounts
If intangible assets are accounted for at revalued amounts, an entity should disclose the
following:
(a) by class of intangible assets:
(i)
the effective date of the revaluation;
(ii)
the carrying amount of revalued intangible assets; and
(iii)
the carrying amount that would have been recognized had the revalued class
of intangible assets been measured after recognition using the cost model; and
(b)
the amount of the revaluation surplus that relates to intangible assets at the beginning
and end of the period, indicating the changes during the period and any restrictions on
the distribution of the balance to shareholders.
If necessary, it is acceptable to aggregate the classes of revalued assets into larger classes
for disclosure purposes. However, classes are not aggregated if this would result in the
combination of a class of intangible assets that includes amounts measured under both the
cost and revaluation models.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.259
7) Research and development expenditure
An entity should disclose the aggregate amount of research and development expenditure
recognized as an expense during the period.
Other information
8)
An entity is encouraged, but not required, to disclose the following information:
(a)
(b)
a description of any fully amortised intangible asset that is still in use; and
a brief description of significant intangible assets controlled by the entity but not
recognized as assets because they did not meet the recognition criteria in this
Standard or because they were acquired or generated before this standard was
effective.
Illustration 10
X Limited engaged in the business of manufacturing fertilisers entered into a technical
collaboration agreement with a foreign company Y Limited. As a result, Y Limited would provide
the technical know-how enabling X Limited to manufacture fertiliser in a more efficient way.
X Limited paid  10,00,00,000 for the use of know-how for a period of 5 years. X Limited estimates
the production of fertiliser as follows:
)
At the end of the 1st year, it achieved its targeted production. At the end of 2nd year, 65,000 metric
tons of fertiliser was being manufactured, and X Limited considered to revise the estimates for the
next 3 years. The revised figures are 85,000, 1,05,000 and 1,15,000 metric tons for year 3, 4 &
5 respectively.
Advise how X Limited will amortise the technical know-how fees as per Ind AS 38.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.260
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
Based on the above data, it may be suitable for X Ltd. to use unit of production method for
amortisation of technical know-how.
The total estimated unit to be produced 4,50,00 MT. The technical know-how will be amortised on
the basis of the ratio of yearly production to total production.
The first-year charge should be a proportion of 50,000 / 4,50,000 on  10,00,00,000
$=\overline{\times}1,11,11,111.$
At the end of 2nd year, as per revised estimate the total number of units to be produced in future
are 3,70,000 MT (i.e. $65,000+85,000+1,05,000+1,15,000)$.
The amortisation for second year will be 65,000 / 3,70,000 on (10,00,00,000 – 1,11,11,111)
ie 1,56,15,615.
Amortisation for remaining years (unless the estimates are again revised):
Year $3=85,000/3,70,000$ on (10,00,00,000 – 1,11,11,111) ie. 2,04,20,420
Year $4=1,05,000/3,70,000$ on (10,00,00,000 – 1,11,11,111) ie. 2,52,25,225
Year $5=1,15,000/3,70,000$ on (10,00,00,000 – 1,11,11,111) ie. 2,76,27,628
*****
Illustration 11
X Ltd. purchased a patent right on 1st April, 20X1, for 3,00,000, which has a legal life of
15 years. However, due to the competitive nature of the product, the management estimates a
useful life of only 5 years. Straight-line amortisation is determined by the management to be the
best method. As at 1st April, 20X2, management is uncertain that the process can actually be
made economically feasible, and decides to write down the patent to an estimated market value
of  1,50,000 and decides to amortise over 2 years. As at 1st April, 20X3, having perfected the
related production process, the asset is now appraised at a value of  3,00,000. Furthermore,
the estimated useful life is now believed to be 4 more years.
Determine the value of intangible asset at the end of each financial year.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
Value as on 31st March, 20X2
Value as on 31st March, 20X3
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.261
On 1st April, 20X2, the downward revaluation is recorded by writing down the asset to the
estimated value of  1,50,000, which necessitates a 90,000 charge to profit & loss (carrying
value, 2,40,000 less fair value  1,50,000).
Amortisation provided for the financial year 20X2-20X3 is  75,000 ( 1,50,000/2)
Net value is $=\mathbb{\times}1,50,000-\mathbb{\times}75,000=\mathbb{\times}75,000.$
Value as on 31st March, 20X4
As of 1st April, 20X3, the carrying value of the patent is 75,000.
Revalued amount of patent is 3,00,000.
Out of total revaluation gain of 2,25,000, ₹90,000 will be charged to profit & loss and balance
amount of 1,35,000 (₹2,25,000  ₹90,000) will be credited to revaluation reserve in OCI.
Amortisation provided for the financial year 20X3-20X4 is ₹75,000 ( 3,00,000 / 4)
Net value is $=\mathbb{7}3,00,000-\mathbb{\times}75,000=\mathbb{\times}2,25,000.$
Similarly, Value as on March 31, $20\times5=\vec{\times}2,25,000-\vec{\times}75,000=\vec{\times}1,50,000$
Value as on March 31, $20\times6=\vec{\times}1,50,000-\vec{\times}75,000=\vec{\times}75,000$
Value as on March 31, $20\times7=\mathbb{\times}75,000-\mathbb{\times}75,000=Nil$
*****
Illustration 12
X Pharmaceutical Ltd. seeks your opinion in respect of following accounting transactions:
1.
Acquired a 4 year license to manufacture a specialised drug at a cost of  1,00,00,000 at
the start of the year. Production commenced immediately.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.262
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.
Also purchased another company at the start of year.
X Pharmacy Ltd. acquired a brand with a fair value of
revenue. The life of the brand is estimated at 15 years.
As part of that acquisition,
3,00,00,000 based on sales
3.
4.
5.
Spent 1,00,00,000 on an advertising campaign during the first six months. Subsequent
sales have shown a significant improvement and it is expected this will continue for 3 years.
It has commenced developing a new drug 'Drug-A'. The project cost would be
 10,00,00,000. Clinical trial proved successful and such drug is expected to generate
revenue over the next 5 years.
Cost incurred (accumulated) till 31st March, 20X1 is  5,00,00,000.
Balance cost incurred during the financial year 20X1-20X2 is  5,00,00,000.
It has also commenced developing another drug 'Drug B'. It has incurred  50,00,000
towards research expenses till 31st March, 20X2. The technological feasibility has not yet
been established.
Advise how the above transactions will be accounted for in the books of account of
X Pharmaceutical Ltd.
Solution
X Pharmaceutical Ltd. is advised as under:
1.
2.
It should recognize the drug license as an intangible asset because it is a separate external
purchase, separately identifiable asset and considered successful in respect of feasibility and
probable future cash inflows.
The drug license should be recorded at 1,00,00,000.
It should recognize the brand as an intangible asset because it is purchased as part of
acquisition and it is separately identifiable. The brand should be amortised over a period of
15 years.
The brand will be recorded at 3,00,00,000.
3.
The advertisement expenses of  1,00,00,000 should be expensed off.
4.
The development cost incurred during the financial year 20X1-20X2 should be capitalised.
Cost of intangible asset (Drug A) as on 31st March, 20X2
Opening cost
 5,00,00,000
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.263
Development cost
Total cost
5,00,00,000
 10,00,00,000
Research expenses of  50,00,000 incurred for developing 'Drug B' should be expensed off
since technological feasibility has not yet established.
*****
5.15 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Reliance Industries Limited'
for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to Intangible assets and Intangible assets under
development and accounting policy with respect to Intangible assets.
Balance Sheet
As at 31st March, 2022
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.264
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1. Property, Plant & Equipment, Capital Work-In-Progress, Intangible Assets and Intangible Assets under Development
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.265
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Intangible assets:
Intangible Assets are stated at cost of acquisition net of recoverable taxes, trade discount and
rebates less accumulated amortisation/depletion and impairment losses, if any. Such cost
includes purchase price, borrowing costs, and any cost directly attributable to bringing the
asset to its working condition for the intended use, net charges on foreign exchange contracts
and adjustments arising from exchange rate variations attributable to the Intangible Assets.
Subsequent costs are included in the asset's carrying amount or recognized as a separate
asset, as appropriate, only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with
the item will flow to the entity and the cost can be measured reliably.
Other Indirect Expenses incurred relating to project, net of income earned during the project
development stage prior to its intended use, are considered as pre-operative expenses and
disclosed under Intangible Assets Under Development.
Gains or losses arising from derecognition of an Intangible Asset are measured as the
difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and are
recognized in the Statement of Profit and Loss when the asset is derecognized. The
Company's intangible assets comprises assets with finite useful life which are amortised on a
straight-line basis over the period of their expected useful life.
A summary of amortisation/depletion policies applied to the Company's Intangible Assets to
the extent of depreciable amount is as follows:
Technical Know-How - Over the useful life of the underlying assets ranging from 5 years
to 35 years.
Computer Software - Over a period of 5 years.
Development Rights - Depleted using the unit of production method. The cost of
producing wells along with its related facilities including decommissioning costs are
depleted in proportion of oil and gas production achieved vis-à-vis Proved Developed
Reserves. The cost for common facilities including its decommissioning costs are
depleted using Proved Reserves
Others - In case of Jetty, the aggregate amount amortised to date is not less than the
aggregate rebate availed by the Company
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.266
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Company assesses at each reporting date as to whether there is any indication that any
Intangible Assets may be impaired. If any such indication exists, the recoverable amount of an
intangible asset is estimated to determine the extent of impairment, if any.
An impairment loss is recognized in the Statement of Profit and Loss to the extent, asset's
carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount is higher of an
asset's fair value less cost of disposal and value in use. Value in use is based on the estimated
future cash flows, discounted to their present value using pre-tax discount rate that reflects
current market assessments of the time value of money and risk specific to the assets
The impairment loss recognized in prior accounting period is reversed if there has been a
change in the estimate of recoverable amount.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - 'Reliance Industries Limited')
5.16 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 38 VIS-À-VIS
AS 26
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.267
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.268
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.269
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.270
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.271
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
X Ltd. is engaged in the business of publishing Journals. They acquired 100% stake in
Y Ltd., a company in the same industry. X Ltd. paid purchase consideration of
10,00,00,000 and fair value of net assets acquired is 8,50,00,000. The purchase
consideration includes payment for the following as well:
2.
3.
(a)
 30,00,000 for obtaining the skilled staff of Y Ltd.
(b)
 50,00,000 by way of payment towards 'Non-compete Fee' so as to restrict Y Ltd. to
compete in the same line of business for next 5 years.
However, the above items (a) and (b) are not forming part of the net assets acquired of
 8,50,00,000.
Determine how the above transactions be accounted for by X Ltd.
X Ltd. purchased a franchise from a restaurant chain at a cost of  1,00,00,000 and the
franchise has 10 years life. In addition, the franchise agreement mentions that the franchisee
would also pay the franchisor royalty as a percentage of sales made.
Advise whether the franchise rights be treated as an intangible asset under Ind AS 38.
An entity regularly places advertisements in newspapers advertising its products and includes
a reply slip that informs individuals replying to the advertisement that the entity may pass on
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.272
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
5.
6.
7.
the individual's details to other sellers of similar products, unless the individual ticks a box in
the advertisement.
Over a period of time the entity has assembled a list of customers' names and addresses.
The list is provided to other entities for a fee. The entity would like to recognize an asset in
respect of the expected future economic benefits to be derived from the list.
Evaluate whether the customer list be treated as an intangible asset under Ind AS 38.
A software company X Ltd. is developing new software for the telecom industry. It employs
100 employs engineers trained in that particular discipline who are engaged in the
development of the software. X Ltd. feels that it has an excellent HR policy and does not
expect any of its employees to leave in the near future. It wants to recognize these set of
engineers as a human resources asset in the form of an intangible asset.
Advise X Ltd. on the above issue.
X Ltd. has acquired a telecom license from Government to operate mobile telephony in two
states of India.
Recommend the cost of acquisition to be capitalised as an intangible asset under Ind AS 38.
X Ltd. purchased a standardised finance software at a list price of 30,00,000 and paid
 50,000 towards purchase tax which is non-refundable. In addition to this, the entity was
granted a trade discount of 5% on the initial list price. X Ltd. incurred cost of  7,00,000
towards customisation of the software for its intended use. X Ltd. also purchased a 5-year
maintenance contract with the vendor company of  2,00,000.
Identify at what cost the intangible asset will be recognized.
X Limited in a business combination, purchased the net assets of Y Limited for 4,00,000 on
31st March, 20X1. The assets and liabilities position of Y Limited just before the acquisition
is as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 38
5.273
Liabilities
Trade payable
50,000
The fair market value of the PPE, intangible asset 1 and intangible asset 2 is available and
they are 1,50,000,  30,000 and 70,000 respectively.
Recommend how would X Limited account for the net assets acquired from Y Limited.
Answers
1.
2.
3.
X Ltd. should recognize an intangible asset in respect of the consideration paid towards 'Non-
Compete Fee'.
However, amount paid for obtaining skilled staff amounting to 30,00,000 does not meet the
definition of intangible asset since X Ltd. has not established any right over the resource and
the same should be expensed. The entity has insufficient control over the expected future
economic benefits arising from the team of skilled staff.
Therefore, 50,00,000 will be separately recognized as an intangible asset, whereas amount
paid for obtaining skilled staff does not meet the recognition criteria for being identified as a
separate intangible asset. However, since it is acquired as part of a business combination, it
forms part of the goodwill recognized at the acquisition date.
The value of goodwill would be  1,00,00,000 (₹ 1,50,00,000 – ₹ 50,00,000).
The franchise rights meets the identification criterion of an intangible asset since it arises
from the contractual rights. It is acquired separately and it's cost can be measured reliably.
In addition, X Ltd. will have future economic benefits and control over them from the franchise
rights.
X Ltd. should recognize the franchise right as intangible asset and amortise it over 10 years.
Royalty as a percentage of sales paid to the franchisor would be a charge to the profit and
loss in the books of the X Ltd.
In this situation, the entity has no legal rights to the customer relationship, but exchange
transactions have taken place that evidence separability of the asset and the control that the
entity is able to exercise over the asset. Therefore, the list is an intangible asset. However,
the entity may not recognize the asset because the cost of generating the customer list
internally cannot be distinguished from the cost of developing the business as a whole. It
does not meet the conditions specified to recognize an internally generated intangible asset.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.274
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
5.
6.
Although, without doubt the skill sets of the employees make them extremely valuable to the
company, however it does not have control over them. Merely having good HR policies would
not make them eligible to be recognized as an intangible asset.
Cost of acquisition of the telecom license can be capitalised as an intangible asset under the
head Licenses, as the cost is ascertainable, and it will lead to future economic benefits for X
Ltd.
In accordance with Ind AS 38, the cost of a separately acquired intangible asset is its
purchases price and non-refundable purchase taxes, after deducting trade discounts and
rebates and any directly attributable cost of preparing the asset for its intended use.
Therefore, the initial cost of the asset should be:
7.
The maintenance contract of 2,00,000 is an expense and therefore should be taken as a
prepaid expense and charged to profit and loss over a period of 5 years.
X Limited will account for the assets acquired from Y Limited in following manner:
Note 1- Goodwill is the difference between fair value of net assets acquired and purchase
consideration paid when is calculated as follow:
Goodwill = 4,00,000- (1,50,000 + 70,000 + 30,000 + 1,30,000 - 50,000) =  70,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
