CHAPTER
10
OTHER INDIAN ACCOUNTING
STANDARDS
UNIT 1:
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41: AGRICULTURE
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
State the objective and scope of the standard
Define the terms agricultural activity, agricultural produce, bearer plant,
biological asset and biological transformation
Explain the principles of recognition and measurement
Compute the gain and loss on initial and subsequent measurement
Account for the grant relating to a biological asset
List the various disclosures prescribed in this standard
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.2
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT OVERVIEW
Ind AS 41: Agriculture
Objective and
Scope
Definition
Recognition and
Measurement
Disclosures
Gains and losses
General
Agriculture related
definitions
Additional
disclosures
General
definitions
Inability to measure
fair value reliably
Government
grants
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.3
1.1 INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE
Ind AS 41, Agriculture is the first standard that specifically covers the accounting and reporting
requirements for the primary sector. Prior to this standard, there were no established guidance on
agriculture and allied industry. This Standard introduces a fair value model to agriculture
accounting which is a major shift away from the traditional cost model widely applied in primary
industry.
Ind AS 41 Agriculture sets out the accounting for agricultural activity, the management of the
transformation of biological assets (living plants and animals) into agricultural produce (harvested
product of the entity's biological assets). The standard generally requires biological assets to be
measured at fair value less costs to sell.
Ind AS 41 addresses following key critical issues:
(a)
(b)
When should a biological asset or agricultural produce be recognised on the Balance
Sheet?
At what value should a recognised biological asset or agricultural produce be measured?
(c)
How should the differences in value of a recognised biological asset or agricultural produce
be accounted for between two different reporting dates?
(d)
What should be the key disclosures?
1.2 SCOPE
1.
This Standard shall be applied to account for the following when they relate to agricultural
activity:
(a)
biological assets;
(b)
agricultural produce at the point of harvest; and
(c)
2.
government grants
Ind AS 41 does not apply to:
(a)
land related to agricultural activity for example, the land on which the biological
assets grow, regenerate and/or degenerate (Ind AS 16 Property, Plant and
Equipment and Ind AS 40 Investment Property);
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.4
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
(d)
bearer plants related to agricultural activity. Such bearer plants are covered within
the scope of Ind AS 16, Property, plant and Equipment and is accounted as per the
provisions of that standard. However, this Standard applies to the produce on those
bearer plants.
government grants related to bearer plants (Ind AS 20 Accounting for Government
Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance).
intangible assets associated with the agricultural activity, for example licenses and
rights are covered under Ind AS 38 Intangible Assets and provisions of this standard
will be applicable.
(e) right-of-use assets arising from a lease of land related to agricultural activity
(Ind AS 116, Leases).
This Standard is applied to agricultural produce, which is the harvested product of the entity's
biological assets, only at the point of harvest. Thereafter, Ind AS 2 or another applicable
Standard is applied.
The table below provides examples of biological assets, agricultural produce, and products that
are the result of processing after harvest:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.5
Some plants, for example, tea bushes, grape vines, oil palms and rubber trees, usually meet the
definition of a bearer plant and are within the scope of Ind AS 16, Property, plant and Equipment.
However, the produce growing on bearer plants, for example, tea leaves, grapes, oil palm fruit
and latex, are within the scope of Ind AS 41.
1.3 RELEVANT DEFINITIONS
The following are the key Agriculture-related definitions:
(a)
Agricultural activity refers to the management by an entity of the biological transformation
and harvest of biological assets for sale or for conversion into agricultural produce or into
additional biological assets.
The standard states that 'agricultural activity' covers a wide range of activities, e.g. 'raising
livestock, forestry, annual or perennial cropping, cultivating orchards and plantations,
floriculture, and aquaculture (including fish farming)'. Nevertheless, these agricultural
activities have certain common features:
1.
II.
III.
Capability to change Living animals and plants are capable of biological
transformation;
Management of change Management facilitates biological transformation by
enhancing, or at least stabilising, conditions necessary for the process to take place
(for example, nutrient levels, moisture, temperature, fertility, and light). Such
management distinguishes agricultural activity from other activities. For example,
harvesting from unmanaged sources (such as ocean fishing and deforestation) is
not agricultural activity; and
Measurement of change The change in quality (for example, genetic merit, density,
ripeness, fat cover, protein content, and fibre strength) or quantity (for example,
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.6
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
progeny, weight, cubic metres, fibre length or diameter, and number of buds) brought
about by biological transformation or harvest is measured and monitored as a routine
management function.
Ind AS 41 does not deal with the processing of agricultural produce after harvest. The
standard makes it clear that, even if the processing is considered 'a logical and natural
extension of agricultural activity, and the events taking place bear some similarity to
biological transformation, such processing is not included within the definition of agricultural
activity'. For example, the process of brewing beer in which yeast (a fungus) converts
sugars into alcohol - would not meet the definition of agricultural activity in the standard.
Similarly, cheese production would fall outside the definition of agricultural activity.
Biological Asset is defined as a living animal or plant.
(c) Biological transformation comprises the processes of growth, degeneration, production,
and procreation that cause qualitative or quantitative changes in biological asset.
Biological Transformation
Processes
(Casuing Qualitative or Quantitative changes in a Biological Asset)
Growth
Degeneration
Production
Procreation
An increase in quantity
or Improvement in
quality of an animal or
plant)
A decrease in the
quantity or deterioration
in quality of an animal
or plant
Of agricultural
produce such as
latex, tea leaf, wool,
and mik
Creation of additional
living animals or
plants
(d) Agricultural produce is the harvested product of the entity's biological assets.
Ind AS 41 only applies to agricultural produce (i.e. harvested produce) at the point of
harvest; not prior or subsequent to harvest. Under Ind AS 41, unharvested agricultural
produce is considered to be part of the biological asset from which it will be harvested.
Therefore, before harvest, agricultural produce should not be accounted for separately from
the biological asset from which it comes. For example, milk is accounted for as part of the
dairy cow right up to the moment at which the cow is milked.
Subsequent to harvest, agricultural produce is accounted for under Ind AS 2 or another
standard, if applicable. Under Ind AS 2, agricultural produce is initially recognised as
inventory at its fair value less costs to sell (measured in accordance with Ind AS 41), which
becomes its cost for Ind AS 2 purposes.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.7
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Harvest is the detachment of produce from a biological asset or the cessation of a
biological asset's life processes.
Fair Value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability
in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. (The
definition of Fair value is as given in Ind AS 113, Fair Value Measurement)
Costs to sell are the incremental costs directly attributable to the disposal of an asset,
excluding finance costs and income taxes. Therefore, of all the costs that are necessary
for a sale to occur, costs to sell include those that would otherwise not arise. Examples of
costs to sell could include brokers' and dealers' commissions, levies by regulatory agencies
and commodity exchanges, transfer taxes and duties.
Bearer plant may be defined as a living plant that:
i.
is used in the production or supply of agricultural produce;
ii.
is expected to bear produce for more than one period; and
iii.
has a remote likelihood of being sold as agricultural produce, except for incidental
scrap sales.
All of the above criteria need to be met for a plant to be considered a bearer plant.
The definition captures plants that would intuitively be considered to be bearers, for instance,
grape vines. Some plants that may appear to be consumable, such as the root systems of
perennial plants (e.g. sugar cane, bamboo or asparagus), but due to the perennial nature of their
root systems, they are expected to meet the definition of a bearer plant.
Annual crops and other plants that are held solely to be harvested as agricultural produce (e.g.
many traditional arable crops such as maize, wheat and soya, as well as trees grown for lumber),
are explicitly excluded from the definition of a bearer plant. In addition, plants that have a dual
use (i.e. plants cultivated to bear agricultural produce, but for which there is more than remote
likelihood that the plant itself will be harvested and sold as agricultural produce, beyond incidental
scrap sales) are not bearer plants. This may be the case when, for example, an entity holds rubber
trees to sell both the latex as agricultural produce and the trees as lumber.
For example, tea bushes, grape vines, oil palms and rubber trees, usually meet the definition of a
bearer plant and are outside the scope of Ind AS 41 and covered under Ind AS 16.
However, produce growing on bearer plant is a biological asset.
This is important to note here that animals are not covered in the definition of the bearer plants.
For example, Sheep, Cows etc are not bearer plants.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.8
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 1
ABC Ltd grows vines, harvests the grapes and produces wine. Which of these activities are in the
scope of Ind AS 41?
Solution
The grape vines are bearer plants that continually generate crops of grapes which are covered by
Ind AS 16, Property, Plant and Equipment.
When the entity harvests the grapes, their biological transformation ceases and they become
agricultural produce covered by Ind AS 41, Agriculture.
Wine involves a lengthy maturation period. This process is similar to the conversion of raw
materials to a finished product rather than biological transformation hence treated as inventory in
accordance with Ind AS 2, Inventories.
*****
1.4 RECOGNITION OF ASSETS
Entities are required to recognise a biological asset or agricultural produce when, and only when,
all of the following conditions are met:
a)
b)
c)
the entity controls the asset as a result of past events;
Control over biological assets or agricultural produce may be evidenced by legal ownership
or rights to control, for example legal ownership of cattle and the branding or otherwise
marking of the cattle on acquisition, birth, or weaning.
it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the asset will flow to the entity;
and
Future economic benefits are expected to flow to the enterprise from its ownership or
control of the asset. The future benefits are normally assessed by measuring the significant
physical attributes.
the fair value or cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.9
1.5 MEASUREMENT
Biological Asset should be measured on initial recognition and at the end of each reporting period
at its fair value less costs to sell, except for the case where the fair value cannot be measured
reliably.
There is a presumption that fair value can be measured reliably for a biological asset. In the
following cases biological asset should be measured at its cost less any accumulated depreciation
and any accumulated impairment losses in accordance with Ind AS 2, Ind AS 16 and Ind AS 36:
•
•
quoted market prices are not available for the biological assets and;
alternative fair value measurements are determined to be clearly unreliable.
Once the fair value of such a biological asset becomes reliably measurable, an entity shall
measure it at its Fair value less costs to sell.
The presumption can be rebutted only on initial recognition. An entity that has previously
measured a biological asset at its fair value less costs to sell continues to measure the biological
asset at its fair value less costs to sell until disposal.
In all cases, an entity measures agricultural produce at the point of harvest at its fair value less
costs to sell. This Standard reflects the view that the fair value of agricultural produce at the point
of harvest can always be measured reliably.
Agricultural produce harvested from an entity's biological assets should be measured at its fair
value less costs to sell at the point of harvest. Such measurement is the cost at that date when
applying Ind AS 2 or another applicable Standard.
The fair value measurement of a biological asset or agricultural produce may be facilitated by
grouping biological assets or agricultural produce according to significant attributes; for example,
by age or quality. An entity selects the attributes corresponding to the attributes used in the
market as a basis for pricing.
The fair value less cost to sell of a biological asset can change due to both physical changes and
price changes in the market.
Entities often enter into contracts to sell their biological assets or agricultural produce at a future
date. Contract prices are not necessarily relevant in measuring fair value, because fair value
reflects the current market conditions in which market participant buyers and sellers would enter
into a transaction. As a result, the fair value of a biological asset or agricultural produce is not
adjusted because of the existence of a contract.
Cost may sometimes approximate fair value, particularly when:
a) little biological transformation has taken place since initial cost incurrence (for example, for
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.10
FINANCIAL REPORTING
b)
fruit tree seedlings planted immediately prior to the end of a reporting period or newly
acquired livestock); or
the impact of the biological transformation on price is not expected to be material (for
example, for the initial growth in a 30-year pine plantation production cycle)
Biological assets are often physically attached to land (for example, trees in a plantation forest).
There may be no separate market for biological assets that are attached to the land but an active
market may exist for the combined assets, that is, the biological assets, raw land, and land
improvements, as a package. An entity may use information regarding the combined assets to
measure the fair value of the biological assets. For example, the fair value of raw land and land
improvements may be deducted from the fair value of the combined assets to arrive at the fair
value of biological assets.
Biological Assets
Recognition
the
entity
controls the
asset as a
result of past
events
it is probable
that future
economic
benefits
associated
the fair value
or cost of the
asset can be
Measurement
initial
recognition
at the end of each
reporting period
measured
reliably
with the asset
will flow to the
entity
at its fair value less costs to sell
Exception
This presumption can be rebutted only on initial recognition for a biological asset when
a. quoted market prices are not available and
b.
alternative fair value measurements determined are clearly unreliable.
In such a case, it shall be measured at its cost less any accumulated depreciation and any
accumulated impairment losses.
Note: Once the fair value of such a biological asset becomes reliably measurable, an entity shall
measure it at its fair value less costs to sell.
Note:
Once a non-current biological asset meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale (or is included
in a disposal group that is classified as held for sale) as per Ind AS 105, it is presumed that fair
value can be measured reliably.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.11
Illustration 2
A farmer owned a dairy herd, of three years old cattle as at 1st April, 20X1 with a fair value of
13,750 and the number of cattle in the herd was 250.
The fair value of three-year cattle as at 31st March, 20X2 was 60 per cattle. The fair value of
four-year cattle as at 31st March, 20X2 is₹75 per cattle.
Calculate the measurement of group of cattle as at 31st March, 20X2 stating price and physical
change separately.
Solution
At the end of reporting period 31st March 20X2
Biological Asset (Cattle A/c)
To Gain - Change in value $(P/L~A/c)$
Dr.
5,000
5,000
(Being change in value of Cattle recognised at the end of the reporting period)
Illustration 3
*****
5,00,000. The
XYZ Ltd., on 1st December, 20X3, purchased 100 sheep from a market for
transaction cost of 2% on the market price of the sheep was incurred which was paid by the seller.
Sheep's fair value increased from ₹500,000 to 600,000 on 31st March, 20X4. Transaction cost
of 2% would have to be incurred by the seller to get the sheep to the relevant market.
Determine the fair value on the date of purchase and the reporting date and pass necessary
journal entries thereon.
Solution
The fair value less cost to sell of sheep's on the date of purchase would be 4,90,000 (5,00,000-
10,000). Expense of 10,000 would be recognised in profit and loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.12
FINANCIAL REPORTING
On date of Purchase
(Being biological asset purchased)
On 31st March, 20X4 sheep would be measured at 5,88,000 as Biological Asset (6,00,000-
12,000) and gain of 98,000 (5,88,000 - 4,90,000) would be recognised in profit or loss.
At the end of reporting period
(Being change in fair value recognised at the end of reporting period)
*****
1.6 GAINS AND LOSSES
1) Biological Asset:
A gain or loss arising on initial recognition of a Biological Asset at Fair value less costs to
sell and from a change in Fair value less costs to sell of a biological asset shall be included
in Profit or Loss for the period in which it arises.
A loss may arise on initial recognition of a biological asset, because cost to sell are
deducted in determining fair value less cost to sell of a biological asset. A gain may arise
on initial recognition of a biological asset, such as when a calf is born.
Example 3
During the reporting period 20X1-20X2, an entity is having a cow which has given birth to
a calf. The fair value less estimated cost to sell for a calf is 5,000. The amount of
5,000 is, therefore, immediately recognised in the Statement of Profit and Loss.
2) Agriculture Produce:
A gain or loss arising on initial recognition of agricultural produce at fair value less costs to
sell shall be included in profit or loss for the period in which it arises.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.13
A gain or loss may arise on initial recognition of agricultural produce as a result of
harvesting.
From biological asset
Gain or Loss
From agricultural produce
Gain or loss on initial
recognition
A loss may arise because
costs to sell are deducted
in determining fair value
less costs to sell of a
biological asset
Change in fair value less costs
to sell on the reporting date
A gain may arise on
reproduction
generation
or
like
when a calf is born
Gain or loss on initial
recognition
Eg. A gain or loss may arise on
initial recognition of agricultural
produce as a result of harvesting
Taken to P&L for the period in which it arises
1.7 GOVERNMENT GRANTS
1) Biological Asset measured at fair value less cost to sell:
a)
b)
Unconditional Grant:
An unconditional government grant related to a biological asset measured at its fair
value less costs to sell shall be recognised in profit or loss when, and only when,
the government grant becomes receivable.
Conditional Grant:
If a government grant related to a biological asset measured at its fair value less
costs to sell is conditional, including when a government grant requires an entity not
to engage in specified agricultural activity, an entity shall recognise the government
grant in profit or loss when, and only when, the conditions attaching to the
government grant are met.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.14
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2)
Terms and conditions of government grants vary. For example, a grant may require
an entity to farm in a particular location for five years and require the entity to return
the entire grant if it farms for a period shorter than five years. In this case, the grant
is not recognised in profit or loss until the five years have passed. However, if the
terms of the grant allow part of it to be retained according to the time elapsed, the
entity recognises that part in profit or loss as time passes.
Example 4
Sun Ltd cultivated a huge plot of land. The government offers a grant of 10 crore under
the condition that the land is being cultivated for 5 years. If the land will be cultivated for a
shorter period, the entity is required to return the entire grant.
Therefore, the government grant will be recognised as income only after 5 years of
cultivation. The situation would be different if the returning obligation referred to the years
of not cultivating the land is with respect to retention of grant for the period till which the
entity has cultivated the land. In this case, the amount of 10 crore would be recognised
as income, proportionately with the time period, meaning 2 crore per annum.
Biological Asset measured at its cost:
If a government grant relates to a Biological Asset measured at its cost less any
accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses i.e. (i.e. inability to
measure fair value reliably), Ind AS 20 is applied.
When the grant is
conditional
Government Grant for
Biological Asset
Measured at Fair
value less cost to sell
Measured at Cost
When the grant is
unconditional
Recognise as per
Ind AS 20
Recognise the government grant in
Profit and Loss Account when the
condition attaching to it are met
Recognise the government grant
in Profit and Loss Account when it
becomes receivable
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.15
Illustration 4
Agro Foods Ltd. runs a poultry farm business. It has received a government grant from the
government for setting up a new poultry unit in a backward area. Agro Foods Ltd used the amount
of government grants to buy the first batch of broiler birds, incubators etc. The broiler birds are
measured at fair value less costs to sell. However, the incubator machine is measured as per the
cost model in Ind AS 16.
As such there are no conditions attached to the release of the government grants pertaining to
purchase of poultry birds. However, as regards the investment in incubators and other related
plant and machinery items, the government grant contains a condition that the plant and machinery
item should be used for a minimum period of 3 years. The useful life of the incubator machine
has also been determined to be 3 years in accordance with the management estimate of the time
period over which the economic benefits embedded in the incubator machine shall be consumed.
Advise the accounting requirements prescribed in Ind AS 41 Agriculture and Ind AS 20 Accounting
for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance in respect of both the
government grants?
Solution
Ind AS 41 requires an unconditional government grant related to a biological asset measured at
its fair value less costs to sell to be recognised in profit or loss when, and only when, the
government grant becomes receivable. Accordingly, the amount of government grant attributable
to the broiler birds which qualify as a biological bird shall be recognized in profit or loss account
when the grant becomes receivable.
If a government grant is conditional, including when a government grant requires an entity not to
engage in specified agricultural activity, an entity should recognize the government grant in profit
or loss when, and only when, the conditions attaching to the government grant are met. This
provision of Ind AS 41 is not applicable as we have been informed that there are no conditions
attached to the release of the government grant pertaining to broiler birds. In the given case, the
grant related to broiler birds has already been received for the purpose of providing immediate
financial support to the entity with no future related conditions to be fulfilled. Accordingly, the
grant relating to broiler birds is to be recognized in profit and loss in the period in which it is
received.
If a government grant relates to a biological asset measured at its cost less any accumulated
depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses, the entity applies Ind AS 20 Accounting for
Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance. The incubator machine does not
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.16
FINANCIAL REPORTING
qualify as a biological asset as it is specifically covered by Ind AS 16 which states that plant and
machinery items used to develop or maintain biological assets is covered by Ind AS 16. Therefore,
the provisions relating to Government grants contained in Ind AS 41 will not apply to the incubator
machine. Therefore, we have to apply directly the provisions contained in IAS 20. Ind AS 20
contains two methods of presentation in financial statements of grants (or the appropriate portions
of grants) related to assets are regarded as acceptable alternatives:
One method recognises the grant as deferred income that is recognized in profit or loss on a
systematic basis over the useful life of the asset.
The other method deducts the grant in calculating the carrying amount of the asset. The
grant is recognized in profit or loss over the life of a depreciable asset as a reduced
depreciation expense.
Therefore, the grant relating to incubator machine will have to be accounted as a deferred income
that is recognized in Profit or loss on a systematic basis over a period of 3 years in line with the
condition attached to the grant. Alternatively, the grant may be deducted in determining the carrying
amount of the incubator. In such a case the grant is recognised in Profit or Loss over the 3-year
useful life of the depreciable incubator machine as a reduced depreciation expense.
1)
2)
1.8 DISCLOSURE
Description of biological assets and activities.
The entity is required to provide a description of each group of biological assets. This
disclosure may take the form of a narrative or quantified description. An entity is
encouraged to provide a quantified description of each group of biological assets,
distinguishing between consumable and bearer biological assets or between mature and
immature biological assets, as appropriate.
Gains and losses recognised during the period.
An entity shall disclose the aggregate gain or loss arising during the current period on initial
recognition of biological assets and agricultural produce and from the change in fair value
less costs to sell of biological assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3)
4)
5)
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.17
Reconciliation of changes in biological assets.
A detailed reconciliation is required of changes in the carrying amount of biological assets
between the beginning and the end of the current period, which includes:
a) gain or loss arising from changes in fair value less costs to sell;
b)
increases arising from purchases;
c)
decreases attributable to sales and biological assets classified as held for sale (or
included in a disposal group that is classified as held for sale) in accordance with
Ind AS 105;
d)
decreases due to harvest;
e)
increases resulting from business combinations;
f)
net exchange differences arising on the translation of financial statements into a
different presentation currency, and on the translation of a foreign operation into the
presentation currency of the reporting entity; and
g) other changes.
Restricted assets, commitments and risk management strategies.
The entity should disclose:
a) the existence and carrying amounts of biological assets whose title is restricted, and
the carrying amounts of biological assets pledged as security for liabilities;
b)
the amount of commitments for the development or acquisition of biological assets;
and
c) financial risk management strategies related to agricultural activity.
Additional disclosures when fair value cannot be measured reliably.
If biological assets within the scope of Ind AS 41 are measured at cost less any
accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses at the end of the period,
the following disclosures are required:
a)
a description of the biological assets;
b)
an explanation of why fair value cannot be measured reliably;
c)
the range of estimates within which fair value is highly likely to lie;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.18
FINANCIAL REPORTING
d)
the depreciation method used;
e)
the useful lives or the depreciation rates used; and
f)
the gross carrying amount and the accumulated depreciation and impairment losses
at the beginning and end of the period.
6)
Government grants
The following disclosures are required for government grants relating to agricultural activity:
a)
the nature and extent of government grants recognised;
b)
unfulfilled conditions and other contingencies attaching to government grants; and
significant decreases expected in the level of government grants.
c)
Illustration 5
Moon Ltd prepares financial statements to 31st March, each year. On 1st April 20X1 the company
carried out the following transactions:
Purchased a land for ₹50 Lakhs.
Purchased 200 dairy cows (average age at 1st April, 20X1 is 2 years) for 10 Lakhs.
Received a grant of 1 million towards the acquisition of the cows. This grant was non-
refundable.
For the year ending 31st March, 20X2, the company has incurred following costs:
6 Lakh to maintain the condition of the animals (food and protection).
 4 Lakh as breeding fee to a local farmer.
On 1st October, 20X1, 100 calves were born. There were no other changes in the number of
animals during the year ended 31st March, 20X2. As of 31st March, 20X2, Moon Ltd had
3,000 litres of unsold milk in inventory. The milk was sold shortly after the year end at market
prices.
Information regarding fair values is as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.19
Prepare extracts from the Balance Sheet and Statement of Profit and Loss that would be reflected
in the financial statements of the entity for the year ended 31st March, 20X2.
Solution
Extract from the Statement of Profit & Loss
Extracts from Balance Sheet
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.20
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Working Notes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Land: The purchase of the land is not covered by Ind AS 41. The relevant standard which
would apply to this transaction is Ind AS 16. Under this standard the land would initially be
recorded at cost and depreciated over its useful economic life. This would usually be
considered to be infinite in the case of land and so no depreciation would be appropriate.
Under Cost Model no recognition would be made for post-acquisition changes in the value
of land. The allowed alternative treatment under Revaluation Model would permit the land
to be revalued to market value with the revaluation surplus taken to the other
comprehensive income. We have followed the Cost Model.
Dairy Cows: Under the 'fair value model' laid down in Ind AS 41 the mature cows would
be recognised in the Balance Sheet at 31st March, 20X2 at the fair value of $200\times\mp5,500$
$=\mathbb{F}11,00,000$
Increase in price change $200\times(5,200-5,000)=40,000$
Increase in physical change $200\times(5,500-5,200)=60,000$
The total difference between the fair value of matured herd and its initial cost ( 11,00,000
$-\mp10,00,000=$ a gain of 1,00,000) would be recognised in the profit and loss along with
the maintenance costs and breeding fee of 6,00,000 and  4,00,000 respectively.
Grant: Grant relating to agricultural activity is not subject to the normal requirement of
Ind AS 20. Under Ind AS 41 such grants are credited to income as soon as they are
unconditionally receivable rather than being recognised over the useful economic life of the
herd. Therefore, ₹10,00,000 would be credited to income of the company.
Calves: They are a biological asset, and the fair value model is applied. The breeding fees
are charged to income and an asset of $100\times\overline{\times}1,300=\overline{\times}1,30,000$ recognised in the
Balance Sheet and credited to Profit and Loss.
Milk: This is agricultural produce and initially recognised on the same basis as biological
assets. Thus the milk would be valued at $3,000\times\overline{\times}24=\overline{\times}72,000$. This is regarded as
'cost' for the future application of Ind AS 2 to the unsold milk.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.21
1.9 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Avanti Feeds Limited' for
the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Biological assets', and its accounting policy.
Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 2022
(All amounts in Lakhs in Indian Rupees, unless otherwise stated)
10 b) Biological Assets
Reconciliation of changes in the carrying amount of biological assets:
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Biological Assets
The Company recognises biological assets only when, the Company controls the assets as a result of
past events, it is probable that future economic benefits associated with such assets will flow to the
Company. Biological assets of the Company are in the nature of Consumable Biological Assets. It is
bifurcated into Brood Stock, (the Parents) and harvested species which undergo biological
transformation under different stages as nauplius, Zoea, Mysis and Post Larvae. The Company sells
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.22
FINANCIAL REPORTING
the biological assets harvested from brood stock at nauplius and Post Larvae Stages. The Brood Stock
has a maximum useful life of 6 months for laying eggs, and thereafter these are destroyed.
The valuation of the Brood stock biological assets are determined on the following basis:
Brood stock are used for captive consumption or to support farmers, it cannot be sold before the end of
its useful life and as such, there is no active market. Other references to market prices such as market
prices for similar assets are also not available due to the uniqueness of the breed. Valuation based on
a discounted cash flow method is considered to be unreliable given the uncertainty with respect to
mortality rates and production. Consequently, brood stock and Shrimp seed (Different stages) are
measured at cost, less depreciation and impairment losses.
The transmission phase from nauplius to Zoea and Mysis are not considered as significant
transformation of biological asset and hence Zoea and Mysis are not valued as per
Ind AS 41.
The Company recognises other biological assets at the fair value or cost of the assets that can be
measured reliably. Expenditure incurred on biological assets are measured on initial recognition and at
the end of each reporting period at its fair value less costs to sell. The gain or loss arising from a change
in fair value less costs to sell the biological assets are included in Statement of Profit and Loss for the
period in which it arises.
Management estimates the fair value less costs to sell of biological assets, taking into account the most
reliable evidence available at each reporting date. The future realization of these biological assets may
be affected by their survival rate, age and / or other market - driven changes that may reduce the future
economic benefits associated with such assets. The fair value is arrived at based on the observable
market prices of biological assets adjusted for cost to sells, as applicable.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - Avanti Feeds Limited')
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.23
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
Questions
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1.
Entity A purchased cattle at an auction on 30th June 20X1
2.
The company would have to incur similar transportation costs if it were to sell the cattle at
auction, in addition to an auctioneer's fee of 2% of sales price. The auctioneer charges 2%
of the selling price, from both, the buyer as well as the seller.
Calculate the amount at which cattle is to be recognised in books on initial recognition and
at year end 31st March, 20X2. Show corresponding journal entries.
XY Ltd. is a farming entity where cows are milked on a daily basis. Milk is kept in cold
storage immediately after milking and sold to retail distributors on a weekly basis. On
1st April 20X1, XY Ltd. had a herd of 500 cows which were all three years old.
During the year, some of the cows became sick and on 30th September 20X1, 20 cows died.
On 1st October 20X1, XY Ltd. purchased 20 replacement cows from the market for 21,000
each. These 20 cows were all one-year old when they were purchased.
On 31st March 20X2, XY Ltd. had 1,000 litres of milk in cold storage which had not been
sold to retail distributors. The market price of milk at 31st March 20X2 was 20 per litre.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.
10.24
FINANCIAL REPORTING
When selling the milk to distributors, XY Ltd. incurs selling costs of 1 per litre. These
amounts did not change during March 20X2 and are not expected to change during
April 20X2.
Information relating to fair value and costs to sell is given below:
The fair value of a 3.5 years old cow on 1st October 20X1 is 27,000.
Pass necessary journal entries of above transactions with respect to cows in the financial
statements of XY Ltd. for the year ended 31st March, 20X2? Also show the amount lying in
inventory if any.
Company X purchased 100 goats at an auction for 1,00,000 on 30th September 20X1.
Subsequent transportation costs were 1,000 that is similar to the cost X would have to
incur to sell the goat at the auction. Additionally, there would be a 2% selling fee on the
market price of the goat to be incurred by the seller.
On 31st March 20X2, the market value of the goat in the most relevant market increases to
1,10,000. Transportation costs of  1,000 would have to be incurred by the seller to get
the goat to the relevant market. An auctioneer's fee of 2% on the market price of the goat
would be payable by the seller.
On 1st June 20X2, X sold 18 goats for 20,000 and incurred transportation charges of
150. In addition, there was a 2% auctioneer's fee on the market price of the goat paid
by the seller.
On 15th September 20X2, the fair value of the remaining goat was 82,820. 42 goats were
slaughtered on that day, with a total slaughter cost of 4,200. The total market price of
the carcasses on that day was 48,300, and the expected transportation cost to sell the
carcasses is 420. No other costs are expected.
On 30th September 20X2, the market price of the remaining 40 goat was 44,800. The
expected transportation cost is  400. Also, there would be a 2% auctioneer's fee on the
market price of the goat payable by the seller.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.25
4.
Pass Journal entries for the initial and subsequent measurement for all above transactions.
Interim reporting periods are of 30th September and 31 March and the company determines
the fair values on these dates for reporting.
On 1st November, 20X1, C Agro Ltd. purchased 100 goats of special breed from a market
for 10,00,000 with a transaction cost of 2%. Goats fair value decreased from 10,00,000
to 9,00,000 as on 31st March, 20X2.
Determine the fair value on the date of purchase and as on financial year ended
31st March, 20X2 under both the cases viz-
(i)
the transaction costs are borne by the seller and
(ii)
the transaction costs are incurred by the seller and purchaser both
Also pass journal entries under both the situations on both dates.
5. Analyse whether the following activities fall within the scope of Ind AS 41 with proper
reasoning:
Managing animal-related recreational activities like Zoo
Answers
Fishing in the ocean
Fish farming
Development of living organisms such as cells, bacteria and viruses
Growing of plants to be used in the production of drugs
Purchase of 25 dogs for security purpose of the company's premises.
1. Initial recognition of cattle
At 31st March, 20X2, the cattle is measured at 1,06,800 i.e. fair value less cost to sell
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
10.26
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(transportation 1,000 and the estimated auctioneer's fee of  2,200). The estimated
transportation costs of getting the cattle to the auction of  1,000 are deducted from the
sales price in determining fair value.
Journal Entries on 30th June, 20X1
(All figures in )
Journal Entries on 31st March, 20X2
(All figures in  )
Journal Entries on
(All figures in )
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.27
Inventory (Milk) as at 31st March, 20X2 = 19,000 [1,000 x (20 – 1)].
Working Note:
Calculation of Biological asset at various dates
3. Value of goat at initial recognition (30th September 20X1)
(All figures are in )
*Fair value of goat = 1,00,000 - 1,000  2,000 (2% of 1,00,000) = 97,000
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.28
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Subsequent measurement at 31st March 20X2
(All figures are in )
** Fair value of goat = 1,10,0000 - 1,000  2,200 (2% of 1,10,000) = 1,06,800
Sale of goat on 1st June 20X2
(All figures are in  )
Transfer of Goat to Inventory on 15th September 20X2
(All figures are in)
#Note: 44,856 is calculated as the proportion of goat sold using the fair value [(1,06,800+
$226-19,450)\times42/82]$
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
10.29
Subsequent measurement of goat at $30^{th}$ September 20X2
##Fair value of goat = 44,800 - 400 - 896 (2% of 44,800) = 43,504.
(All figures are in )
As per para 12 of Ind AS 41, a biological asset shall be measured on initial recognition and
at the end of each reporting period at its fair value less costs to sell. Therefore, regardless
of who bears the transaction costs, the transaction costs of 2% are the costs to sell the
goats on 1st November 20X1, and therefore, the goats should be measured at their fair
value less costs to sell on initial recognition date, i.e.,  9,80,000.
As on 1st November 20X1:
Journal Entry
(i)
Where transaction costs are borne by the seller:
Biological assets (Goats) $A/c$
Dr. 9,80,000
Loss on purchase of biological assets (Goats) $A/c$
To Bank $A/c$
Dr. 20,000
10,00,000
(ii)
Where transaction costs are borne by the seller and buyer both:
Biological assets (Goats) $A/c$
Dr. 9,80,000
Loss on purchase of biological asset (Goats) $A/c$ Dr. 40,000
To Bank A/c
As on 31st March 20X2 - under both the scenarios:
10,20,000
Loss on fair valuation of biological assets $A/c$ Dr. 98,000
To Biological assets (Goats) $A/c$
98,000
[9,80,000 (9,00,000 - 18,000)]
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.30
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 41
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.31
