INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.101
UNIT 3:
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7: STATEMENT
OF CASH FLOWS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to:
☐ Understand the meaning of cash flow statement
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
Describe the objective and scope of issuance of Ind AS 7
Define the relevant terms used in the Ind AS
Classify the types of cash flows into operating, investing and financing
activities
Distinguish between direct and indirect method of presentation of cash
flows under the operating activity
Identify the provision applicable to various peculiar situations of cash
flows
Disclose the necessary information as required in the standard
Differentiate between Ind AS 7 and AS 3.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.102
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT OVERVIEW
• Objectives
• Scope
• Benefits
Ind AS 7
• Definitions
• Operating Cash Flows
• Investing Cash Flows
Presentation of
Statement of
• Financing Cash Flows
Cash Flows
Method of
Presentation
• Direct Method
• Indirect Method
• Reporting on a net basis
• Foreign Currency Transactions
• Interest and Dividend
• Taxes on Income
Peculiar Cases
Investments in Subsidiaries, associates and Joint ventures
of Cash flows
• Changes in ownerships Interests in subsidiaries and other businesses
• Non Cash Transactions
• Components of cash and cash equivalents
• Other Disclosures
Discosure
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.103
3.1 INTRODUCTION
The balance sheet is a snapshot of entity's financial resources and obligations at a particular
point of time and the statement of profit and loss reflects the financial performance for the
period. These two components of financial statements are based on accrual basis of
accounting. The statement of cash flows includes only inflows and outflows of cash and cash
equivalents; it excludes transactions that do not affect cash receipts and payments.
The information on cash flows is useful in assessing sources of generating and deploying cash
and cash equivalents during the reporting period. The statement of cash flows can be used for
comparison with earlier reporting periods of the same entity as well as comparison with other
entities for the same reporting period.
Ind AS 7, Statement of Cash Flows, prescribes principles and guidance on preparation and
presentation of cash flows of an entity from operating activities, investing activities and financing
activities for a reporting period.
3.2 MEANING OF STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Cash flow statement, in simple words is a statement, which provides the details about how the
cash is generated by an entity during the particular reporting period and how it is applied. While
doing so, it takes into consideration the opening balances of cash and cash equivalents, adds
the cash generated, deducts the cash payments and reconciles it with closing balances of cash
and cash equivalents. The cash flows are classified into following three main categories:
(a)
Cash flows from Operating Activities
(b)
Cash flows from Investing Activities
(c)
Cash flows from Financing Activities
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.104
From Investing
Activities
FINANCIAL REPORTING
From Operating
Activities
Cash Flows
From Financing
Activities
The simplified example of cash flow statement, for understanding purpose is given below
Thus, one can see that at the beginning of the year, the opening balance of cash and cash
equivalent was 13,000. During the year, the business generated (inflow) cash from its main
operations 10,000. Thus, the entity had 23,000 at its disposal. Out of it, the entity has
used (outflow)  2,000 for additional investments and 4,000 for financing activities.
Therefore, at the end of the year, the entity is left with the balance of 17,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.105
3.3 OBJECTIVE
Ind AS 7, has specified the following objectives of Statement of Cash Flows:
3.3.1 To provide information about historical changes in cash and
cash equivalents
Cash flow statement aims at providing the information about how the cash has been generated
during the year and for what purposes has it been utilised. The information will be provided for
current year and immediate previous year.
3.3.2 To assess the ability to generate cash and cash equivalents
Cash flow statement is intended to provide the stakeholders about the efficiency of the company
in generating cash and cash equivalents. Some companies may look profitable as per profit and
loss account but whether they have enough cash for payment of their debts and creditors has to
be assessed by using cash flow statement. It is useful in examining the relationship between
profitability and net cash flow and the impact of changing prices.
3.3.3 To understand the timing and certainty of their generation
The historical analysis of statement of cash flow can set a trend regarding the years in which
company could generate fair amount of cash flows and the probability of generating it.
Objectives of Ind AS 7
To assess
the ability of the
entity to generate
cash
and cash
the needs of the
entity to utilise
those cash flows
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
To require
the timing and
certainty
generation of
of
the provision of
information about the
historical changes in
cash and cash
equivalents of an entity
3.106
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.4 BENEFITS OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION
3.4.1 Provides information enabling evaluation of changes in net
assets and financial structure (Liquidity and solvency)
Cash flow statement reconciles the opening balances of cash and cash equivalents with the
closing balances of cash and cash equivalents, giving the reasons for the changes happened
during the year. Thus, it provides a clear picture of cash inflows and out flows that have taken
place during the reporting period.
3.4.2 Assesses the ability to manage the cash
The stakeholders get an idea about what is the source of generation of cash and how it is used
for. The information gives a fair idea about the efficiency and ability of the company to generate
cash.
For example, suppose there is negative cash flow from operations. It denotes that company is
unable to generate cash from its main business activity, which is not a favourable situation.
Cash flow statements can also throw light on whether company could generate sufficient cash or not.
For example, company wants to expand its production capacity. The cash flow statement can
indicate whether company could generate the required cash from their operations, or whether
company has generated the funds from share capital or whether company has taken a loan for
the same.
3.4.3 Assess and compare the present value of future cash flows
The past trends of cash flows will help the company to predict about future cash flows. Such
information is useful while evaluating the projects on capital budgeting or valuation of shares.
Thus, it forms the base for future projects and can be discounted using discounting techniques.
3.4.4 Compares the efficiency of different entities
Accounting profits of various entities may have different assumptions, policies and definitions.
However, cash flows will be calculated by using the same technique and finally all differing
assumptions across the companies will melt down and entity will reach to a common comparable
base of cash and cash equivalents.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.107
3.5 SCOPE
An entity shall prepare a statement of cash flows in accordance with the requirements of this
Standard and shall present it as an integral part of its financial statements for each period for
which financial statements are presented.
The Standard requires all entities to present a statement of cash flows.
Every organisation, whether it is small or big in size, whether it's a manufacturing organisation
or trading concern or service organisation, needs cash for running its business. The cash is
also needed for future investments. Cash would be needed for payment of dividends,
repayment of loans as well. Thus, any organisation is required to generate the cash and utilises
cash continuously.
Banks and Financial institutions are also not an exception to the same. Even if they deal with
financial products, accept deposits and give loans day in and day out, they need to generate the
cash profit for their own organisation. They need to make investments in terms of new
branches, set ups etc. Thus, statement of cash flow is equally important for Banking and
Financial Institutions as well.
3.6 DEFINITIONS
The following terms are used in this Standard with the meanings specified:
1.
Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits.
2.
Cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to
known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
3.
Cash flows are inflows and outflows of cash and cash equivalents.
4.
5.
Operating activities are the principal revenue-producing activities of the entity and other
activities that are not investing or financing activities.
Investing activities are the acquisition and disposal of long-term assets and other
investment not included in cash equivalents.
6. Financing activities are activities that result in changes in the size and composition of the
contributed equity and borrowings of the entity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.108
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.7 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Cash Equivalent means investments which can be realised easily in cash in a short period from
the date of investing the same.
1.
2.
3.
4
5.
6.
Purpose: Cash equivalents are held for the purpose of meeting short-term cash
commitments rather than for investment or other purposes.
Known amount of cash: This means that the cash amount that will be received on
redemption should be known at the time of the initial investment. It is not sufficient that the
instrument itself is readily convertible into cash and has a determinable market value.
Instead, it means that, at the time of the initial investment, the entity is satisfied that the risk
of changes in value is insignificant and that therefore the amount of cash to be received on
redemption is known.
Liquidity and Risk: For an investment to qualify as a cash equivalent it must be readily
convertible to a known amount of cash and be subject to an insignificant risk of changes in
value. Therefore, an investment normally qualifies as a cash equivalent only when it has a
short maturity of, say, three months or less from the date of acquisition.
Equity investments are excluded from cash equivalents unless they are, in substance,
cash equivalents.
Bank borrowings are generally considered to be financing activities. However, the bank
overdrafts may be an integral part of an entity's cash management in which case they will
be included as a component of cash and cash equivalents. A characteristic of such banking
arrangements is that the bank balance often fluctuates from being positive to overdrawn.
Cash Management: Cash flows exclude movements between items that constitute cash or
cash equivalents because these components are part of the cash management of an entity
rather than part of its operating, investing and financing activities. Cash management
includes the investment of excess cash in cash equivalents.
Illustration 1
Company has provided the following information regarding the various assets held by company
on 31st March 20X1. Find out, which of the following items will be part of cash and cash
equivalents for the purpose of preparation of cash flow statement as per the guidance provided
in Ind AS 7:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.109
Solution
*****
3.8 PRESENTATION OF STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The statement of cash flows shall report cash flows during the period classified by operating,
investing and financing activities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.110
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Activities
Operating
Principal revenue-
producing activities of the
entity and other activities
that are not investing or
financing activities
Investing
Activities that result in the
acquisition and disposal of
long-term assets and other
investment not included in
cash equivalents
Financing
Activities that result in
changes in the size and
composition of the
contributed equity and
borrowings of the entity
3.8.1 Operating Activities
• Cash flows from operating activities are primarily derived from the principal revenue
producing activities of the entity ie from operations of the business. Therefore, they are, in
general, the result of the transactions and events that enter into the determination of profit or
loss.
Examples of cash flows from operating activities are:
Illustration 2
From the following transactions, identify which transactions will be qualified for the calculation of
operating cash flows, if company is into the business of trading of mobile phones.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.111
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.112
FINANCIAL REPORTING
*****
• The amount of cash flows arising from operating activities is a key indicator of the extent to
which the operations of the entity have generated sufficient cash flows or not. If the cash
flow from operations is positive, it will be treated as positive indicator whereas negative
cash flow from operations will denote that company's ability to generate the revenue from
its main operations is very weak. The companies in the initial stage of their business or the
companies which are facing economic problems will generally have the negative cash flow
from operations.
•
Cash flow from operations are used to maintain the operating capability of the entity, pay
dividends and make new investment without recourse to external sources of financing.
Therefore, it is necessary to assess how much cash is generated by the business from
operations? Are they sufficient to take care of their future investment plans? Can loans be
repaid in time without default from such cash flows? Is there sufficient amount for payment
of preference dividend? Is anything left for equity shareholders after making all these
payments? Answers to all these questions will depend on whether the entity has generated
enough cash or not.
3.8.1.1 Certain Specific Issues
1.
2.
Profit/Loss on Sale of Assets: Some transactions, such as the sale of an item of plant,
may give rise to a gain or loss that is included in recognised profit or loss. The cash flows
relating to such transactions are cash flows from investing activities.
Properties built for let out: Cash payments to manufacture or acquire assets held for
rental to others and subsequently held for sale are cash flows from operating activities. The
cash receipts from rents and subsequent sales of such assets are also cash flows from
operating activities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.113
3.8.2 Investing Activities
Investment means sacrifice of current resource in a view to get more returns in future. All
entities need some amount of investment for their future survival.
Ind AS 7 states that investing activities represent the extent to which expenditures have been made
for resources intended to generate future income and cash flows. Only expenditures that result in a
recognized asset in the balance sheet are eligible for classification as investing activities.
Examples of cash flows arising from investing activities are:
When a contract is accounted for as a hedge of an identifiable position the cash flows of the
contract are classified in the same manner as the cash flows of the position being hedged.
Illustration 3
From the following transactions taken from a private sector bank operating in India, identify
which transactions will be classified as operating and which would be classified as Investing
activity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.114
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.115
*****
3.8.3 Financing Activities
During the life time of the entity, it needs money for long term investments as well as for working
capital purpose. Company can raise the capital by way of equity or loans. Thus, the cash flows
related to raising of funds and redemption of funds will be covered under Cash flows from
financing activities. The cost of capital is also generally covered under the Financing Activity.
Ind AS 7 states that the cash flows from Financing activity are useful in predicting claims on
future cash flows by providers of capital to the entity.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.116
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 4
From the following transactions taken from a parent company having multiple businesses and
multiple segments, identify which transactions will be classified as Operating, Investing and
Financing:
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.117
*****
Illustration 5
An entity has entered into a factoring arrangement and received money from the factor. Examine
the said transaction and state how should it be presented in the statement of cash flows?
Solution
Under factoring arrangement, it needs to be assessed whether the arrangement is recourse or
non-recourse.
Recourse factoring:
The cash received is classified as a financing cash inflow as the entity continues to recognize
the receivables and the amount received from the factor is indeed a liability, The substance of
the arrangement is financing, as the entity retains substantially all of the risk and rewards of the
factored receivables.
When the cash is collected by the factor, the liability and the receivables are de-recognized. It
is acceptable for this to be disclosed as a non-cash transaction, because the settlement of the
liability and the factored receivables does not result in cash flows. The net impact of these
transactions on the cash flow statement is to present a cash inflow from financing, but there is
no operating cash flow from the original sale to the entity's customers.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.118
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Non-recourse factoring:
Where an entity de-recognises the factored receivables and receives cash from the factor, the
cash receipt is classified as an operating cash inflow. This is because the entity has received
cash in exchange for receivables that arose from its operating activities.
3.9 REPORTING
ACTIVITIES
Cash Flows from
Operating Activities
*****
CASH
FLOWS FROM
OPERATING
Direct Method
Major classes of gross cash receipts and
gross cash payments are disclosed
Indirect Method
Profit or loss is adjusted for the effects of
transactions of a non-cash nature, any
deferrals or accruals of past or future operating
cash receipts or payments, and items of
income or expense associated with investing
or financing cash flows
•
•
An entity shall report cash flows from operating activities using either:
(a)
(b)
the direct method, whereby major classes of gross cash receipts and gross cash
payments are disclosed; or
the indirect method, whereby profit or loss is adjusted for the effects of transactions
of a non-cash nature, any deferrals or accruals of past or future operating cash
receipts or payments, and items of income or expense associated with investing or
financing cash flows.
Entities are encouraged to report cash flows from operating activities using the direct
method. The direct method provides information which may be useful in estimating future
cash flows and which is not available under the indirect method. Under the direct method,
information about major classes of gross cash receipts and gross cash payments may be
obtained either:
(a)
from the accounting records of the entity; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.119
(b) by adjusting sales, cost of sales (interest and similar income and interest expense
and similar charges for a financial institution) and other items in the statement of
profit and loss for:
(i)
(ii)
Analysis
(iii)
changes during the period in inventories and operating receivables and
payables;
other non-cash items; and
other items for which the cash effects are investing or financing cash flows.
Direct method starts with cash revenue / income / receipts of the company. All the cash
expenses will be deducted from such cash revenue. The cash profit will be adjusted for the
cash flows arising from investing and financing activities. Non-cash expenses / losses / gains
will not be considered. The payments to suppliers and receipts from customers are also
taken into consideration. The resultant figure would be cash flow from operating activity. The
exercise would be similar to converting the income and expenditure account (accrual system)
into receipt and payment (cash system), with certain adjustments. Thus, if we consider the
vertical operating statement, direct method will have (TOP down) approach of presentation.
• Under the indirect method, the net cash flow from operating activities is determined by
adjusting profit or loss for the effects of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
changes during the period in inventories and operating receivables and payables;
non-cash items such as depreciation, provisions, deferred taxes, unrealised foreign
currency gains and losses, and undistributed profits of associates; and
all other items for which the cash effects are investing or financing cash flows.
Alternatively, the net cash flow from operating activities may be presented under the
indirect method by showing the revenues and expenses disclosed in the statement of profit
and loss and the changes during the period in inventories and operating receivables and
payables.
Analysis
Indirect method is reverse of direct method. It starts with the accounting profit after tax as
given in profit and loss accounts. Thereafter, the profit will be adjusted for non-cash items,
losses and gains on investing and financing activities, interest and dividends, collection and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.120
FINANCIAL REPORTING
payments to debtors / creditors etc. Accordingly, the cash from operating activity will
derived. Thus indirect method will have (Bottom up) approach.
Note: Under both the methods the amount of cash flow from Operating activities need to be
necessarily same. It's only the approach for presentation which differs.
Illustration 6
Find out the cash from operations by direct method and indirect method from the following information:
Operating statement of ABC Ltd. for the year ended 31.3.20X2
Balance Sheet as on 31st March
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.121
Solution
1. Cash flow from Operations by Direct Method
Particulars
Cash Sales
Less: Cash Purchases
Overheads
Interest
Depreciation
Loss on sale of asset
Cash profit
Less: Tax
Cash profit after tax
₹
See Note
4,97,000.00
1
3,45,000.00
2
52,000.00
3
Financing
Non cash item
Investing item
100,000.00
(30,000.00)
70,000.00
Note No 1 - Cash Receipts from Sales and Trade receivables
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
3.122
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Cash flow from Operations by Indirect Method
Note: Cash flow derived from operations 70,000 is same in both Direct Method and
Indirect Method.
*****
3.10 REPORTING CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING AND
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
An entity is required to report separately major classes of gross cash receipts and gross cash
payments arising from investing and financing activities, except to the extent that cash flows are
permitted to be reported on a net basis.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.123
3.11 REPORTING CASH FLOWS ON A NET BASIS
If nothing is specifically mentioned, then as per Ind AS 7, the cash flows will be presented on
Gross Basis. Gross basis means the receipts would be shown separately and the payments will
be shown separately.
Example 1
If in the year 20X1-20X2, some land is purchased for 2.5 crores and another land is sold for
 3.5 crores then while presenting the information, entity shall show separately outflow of
2.5 crores and inflow of 3.5 crores.
The above base has following exceptions
1.
Cash flows arising from the following operating, investing or financing activities may be
reported on a net basis:
(a) cash receipts and payments on behalf of customers when the cash flows reflect the
activities of the customer rather than those of the entity;
(b)
Examples of cash receipts and payments referred to in paragraph 22(a) are:
• the acceptance and repayment of demand deposits of a bank;
• funds held for customers by an investment entity; and
• rents collected on behalf of, and paid over to, the owners of properties.
Cash receipts and payments for items in which the turnover is quick, the amounts
are large, and the maturities are short.
Examples of cash receipts and payments referred to in paragraph 22(b) are
advances made for, and the repayment of:
• principal amounts relating to credit card customers;
•
the purchase and sale of investments; and
•
other short-term borrowings, for example, those which have a maturity period
of three months or less.
2.
Cash flows arising from each of the following activities of a financial institution maybe
reported on a net basis:
(a)
cash receipts and payments for the acceptance and repayment of deposits with a
fixed maturity date;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.124
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
the placement of deposits with and withdrawal of deposits from other financial
institutions; and
cash advances and loans made to customers and the repayment of those advances
and loans.
•
•
•
3.12 FOREIGN CURRENCY CASH FLOWS
Cash flows arising from transactions in a foreign currency shall be recorded in an entity's
functional currency by applying to the foreign currency amount the exchange rate between
the functional currency and the foreign currency at the date of the cash flow.
The cash flows of a foreign subsidiary shall be translated at the exchange rates between
the functional currency and the foreign currency at the dates of the cash flows.
Example 2
Suppose the money is received on account of exports on 15th January 20X1 in US\$. The
company prepares the accounts in rupees. In such case the exchange rate between USD
and Rupee as on 15th January 20X1 need to be applied for conversion.
Unrealised gains and losses arising from changes in foreign currency exchange rates are
not cash flows. However, the effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash
equivalents held or due in a foreign currency is reported in the statement of cash flows in
order to reconcile cash and cash equivalents at the beginning and the end of the period.
This amount is presented separately from cash flows from operating, investing and
financing activities and includes the differences, if any, had those cash flows been reported
at end of period exchange rates.
3.12.1 Treatment of foreign exchange differences arising from unsettled transactions
relating to operating activities
Under indirect method of preparation of statement of cash flows, the exchange differences that arise on
translation at the balance sheet date, for monetary items that form part of operating activities, will
require no adjustment in the reconciliation of profit to net cash flow from operating activities.
Example 3
Entity A (Indian Company) purchased goods for resale from France during January for EUR 10,000
(Exchange rate: 1 EUR = ₹70) on a credit period of 4 months. It accounted for the purchase of
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.125
inventory at
7,00,000 (10,000 x 70). On 31st March, the exchange rate has changed to
$1~EUR=\overline{8}65$ This would mean an unrealised gain due to exchange fluctuation of  50,000 (since
the payables will be recorded at 6,50,000 (at closing exchange rate).
Assuming that the inventory is unsold at that date, the movement is reported as under:
Profit
Less: Increase in Inventory
Add: Increase in Payables
Net Cash flows from operating activities
 50,000
 (7,00,000)
6,50,000
0
Foreign currency cash flows
Arising from transactions in a foreign currency
Of a foreign subsidiary
Recorded in an entity's functional
currency
Cash
Exchange
rates
flows of a
between
the
foreign
functional
currency
subsidiary
and the foreign
Foreign
currency
amount
between
functional currency
and the foreign
currency at the date
of the cash flow
Exchange rate
currency at the dates
the
of the cash flows
Note:
1.
2.
3.
Cash flows denominated in a foreign currency are reported in a manner consistent
with Ind AS 21.
A weighted average exchange rate for a period may be used for recording foreign
currency transactions or the translation of the cash flows of a foreign subsidiary
Ind AS 21 does not permit use of the exchange rate at the end of the reporting period
when translating the cash flows of a foreign subsidiary
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.126
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.13 INTEREST AND DIVIDENDS
Cash flows from interest and dividends received and paid shall each be disclosed separately.
Interest paid
Interest and dividends
received
Dividends paid
Financing company
Cash flows arising from operating
activities
Cash flows arising from operating
activities
Cash flows from financing
activities
Other company
Cash flows from financing
activities
Cash flows from investing
activities
Cash flows from financing
activities
Interest and Dividends
Cash flows from interest and
dividends received and paid shall
each be disclosed separately
In case of financial institutions
In the case of other entities
Interest paid
Interest and Dividends
dividends
paid
received
Dividends
paid
Interest
paid
Classified as
cash
flows arising
from
operating activities
Interest and
dividends
received
Classified as cash flows from financing
activities
Classified as cash
flows from investing
activities
They are costs of obtaining financial
resources
They are returns on
investments
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.127
Illustration 7
A firm invests in a five-year bond of another company with a face value of  10,00,000 by paying
5,00,000. The effective rate is 15%. The firm recognises proportionate interest income in its
income statement throughout the period of bond.
Based on the above information answer the following question:
a) How the interest income will be treated in cash flow statement during the period of bond?
b) On maturity, whether the receipt of  10,00,000 should be split between interest income and
receipts from investment activity.
Solution
Interest income will be treated as income over the period of bond in the income statement.
However, there will be no cash flow in these years because no cash has been received. On
maturity, receipt of 10,00,000 will be classified as investment activity with a bifurcation of
interest income & money received on redemption of bond.
*****
3.14 TAXES ON INCOME
Cash flows arising from taxes on income shall be separately disclosed and shall be classified as
cash flows from operating activities unless they can be specifically identified with financing and
investing activities.
Taxes on income arise on transactions that give rise to cash flows that are classified as
operating, investing or financing activities in a statement of cash flows. While tax expense may
be readily identifiable with investing or financing activities, the related tax cash flows are often
impracticable to identify and may arise in a different period from the cash flows of the underlying
transaction. Therefore, taxes paid are usually classified as cash flows from operating activities.
However, when it is practicable to identify the tax cash flow with an individual transaction that
gives rise to cash flows that are classified as investing or financing activities the tax cash flow is
classified as an investing or financing activity as appropriate.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.128
Cash flows
arising from
taxes
on
income
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Shall
separately
disclosed
be
When it is
practicable to
►identify
When it is
impracticable
to identify
Shall be classified as
cash flows from
operating activities
when impracticable to
identify with financing
and investing activities
Tax cash flow is
classified as an
investing
financing activity as
appropriate
or
Note: When tax cash flows are allocated over more than one class of activity, the total
amount of taxes paid is disclosed.
Illustration 8
X Limited has paid an advance tax amounting to 5,30,000 during the current year. Out of the
above paid tax, ₹30,000 is paid for tax on long term capital gains.
Under which activity the above said tax be classified in the cash flow statements of X Limited?
Solution
Cash flows arising from taxes on income should be classified as cash flows from operating
activities unless they can be specifically identified with financing and investing activities. In the
case of X Limited, the tax amount of 30,000 is specifically related with investing activities.
 5,00,000 to be shown under operating activities.  30,000 to be shown under investing
activities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.129
3.15 INVESTMENTS IN SUBSIDIARIES, ASSOCIATES AND
JOINT VENTURES
When accounting for an investment in an associate, a joint venture or a subsidiary accounted for
by use of the equity or cost method, an investor restricts its reporting in the statement of cash
flows to the cash flows between itself and the investee, for example, to dividends and advances.
An entity that reports its interest in an associate or a joint venture using the equity method
includes in its statement of cash flows the cash flows in respect of its investments in the
associate or joint venture, and distributions and other payments or receipts between it and the
associate or joint venture.
3.16 CHANGES
IN
OWNERSHIP
INTERESTS
IN
SUBSIDIARIES AND OTHER BUSINESSES
3.16.1 Classification of Cash Flows as Investing Activity
• The aggregate cash flows arising from obtaining or losing control of subsidiaries or other
businesses shall be presented separately and classified as investing activities.
•
An entity shall disclose, in aggregate, in respect of both obtaining and losing control of
subsidiaries or other businesses during the period each of the following:
(a)
the total consideration paid or received;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.130
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
the portion of the consideration consisting of cash and cash equivalents;
(c)
the amount of cash and cash equivalents in the subsidiaries or other businesses
over which control is obtained or lost; and
•
(d)
the amount of the assets and liabilities other than cash or cash equivalents in the
subsidiaries or other businesses over which control is obtained or lost, summarised
by each major category.
The separate presentation of the cash flow effects of obtaining or losing control of
subsidiaries or other businesses as single line items, together with the separate disclosure
of the amounts of assets and liabilities acquired or disposed of, helps to distinguish those
cash flows from the cash flows arising from the other operating, investing and financing
activities. The cash flow effects of losing control are not deducted from those of obtaining
control.
The aggregate amount of the cash paid or received as consideration for obtaining or losing
control of subsidiaries or other businesses is reported in the statement of cash flows net of
cash and cash equivalents acquired or disposed of as part of such transactions, events or
changes in circumstances.
3.16.2 Classification of Cash Flows as Financing Activity
• Cash flows arising from changes in ownership interests in a subsidiary that do not result
in a loss of control shall be classified as cash flows from financing activities, unless the
subsidiary is held by an investment entity and is required to be measured at fair value
through profit or loss.
•
Changes in ownership interests in a subsidiary that do not result in a loss of control, such
as the subsequent purchase or sale by a parent of a subsidiary's equity instruments, are
accounted for as equity transactions (see Ind AS 110), unless the subsidiary is held by an
investment entity and is required to be measured at fair value through profit or loss.
Accordingly, the resulting cash flows are classified in the same way as other transactions
with owners.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.131
Changes in ownership interests in subsidiaries and other businesses
Cash flows arising from
Obtaining control of subsidiaries or
other businesses
Losing control of subsidiaries or other
businesses
Shall disclose, in aggregate, during
the period
Shall be classified
as
investing
activities
Shall be presented
separately
The cash flow effects of losing control are not
deducted from those of obtaining control
The
total
consideratio
n paid or
received
The portion of
the
consideration
consisting of
cash and cash
equivalents
The amount of cash
and cash equivalents in
the subsidiaries or
other businesses over
which control is
obtained or lost
Cash flows arising from changes in ownership interests
in a subsidiary that do not result in a loss of control
The amount of the
assets and liabilities
other than cash or cash
equivalents in the
subsidiaries or other
businesses over which
control is obtained or
lost, summarised by
each major category
Shall be classified as cash flows from
financing activities, unless the subsidiary
is held by an investment entity
Need not apply to an investment in a subsidiary
measured at fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.132
FINANCIAL REPORTING
•
•
•
3.17 NON-CASH TRANSACTIONS
Investing and financing transactions that do not require the use of cash or cash equivalents
shall be excluded from a statement of cash flows.
Such transactions shall be disclosed elsewhere in the financial statements in a way that
provides all the relevant information about these investing and financing activities.
Many investing and financing activities do not have a direct impact on current cash flows
although they do affect the capital and asset structure of an entity. Such non-cash items
will not form part of the cash flow statement.
Examples of non-cash transactions are:
(a)
the acquisition of assets either by assuming directly related liabilities or by means of
a lease;
(b)
the acquisition of an entity by means of an equity issue; and
(c)
the conversion of debt to equity
Illustration 9
X Limited acquires fixed asset of  10,00,000 from Y Limited by accepting the liabilities of
8,00,000 of Y Limited and balance amount it paid in cash. How X Limited will treat all those
items in its cash flow statements?
Solution
Investing and financing transactions that do not require the use of cash and cash equivalents
shall be excluded from a statement of cash flows. X Limited should classify cash payment of
2,00,000 under investing activities. The non-cash transactions -liabilities and asset should be
disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
*****
3.17.1 Changes in liabilities arising from financing activities
• An entity shall provide disclosures that enable users of financial statements to evaluate
changes in liabilities arising from financing activities, including both changes arising from
cash flows and non-cash changes.
•
To the extent necessary to satisfy the above requirement, an entity shall disclose the
following changes in liabilities arising from financing activities:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.133
(a)
changes from financing cash flows;
(b)
changes arising from obtaining or losing control of subsidiaries or other businesses;
(c)
the effect of changes in foreign exchange rates;
(d)
changes in fair values; and
(e)
other changes.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Liabilities arising from financing activities are liabilities for which cash flows were, or future
cash flows will be, classified in the statement of cash flows as cash flows from financing
activities.
In addition, the disclosure requirement also applies to changes in financial assets (for
example, assets that hedge liabilities arising from financing activities) if cash flows from
those financial assets were, or future cash flows will be, included in cash flows from
financing activities.
One way to fulfil the disclosure requirement is by providing a reconciliation between the
opening and closing balances in the balance sheet for liabilities arising from financing
activities, including the changes identified.
If an entity provides the disclosure required in combination with disclosures of changes in
other assets and liabilities, it shall disclose the changes in liabilities arising from financing
activities separately from changes in those other assets and liabilities.
3.18 COMPONENTS OF CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
An entity shall disclose the components of cash and cash equivalents and shall present a
reconciliation of the amounts in its statement of cash flows with the equivalent items
reported in the balance sheet.
Company will provide a policy which it adopts in determining the composition of cash and
cash equivalents (As per Ind AS 1).
It has been clarified, that there should not be a difference in the amount of cash and cash
equivalent as per Ind AS 1 and as per Ind AS 7. However, as per Ind AS 7 "where bank
overdrafts which are repayable on demand form an integral part of an entity's cash
management, bank overdrafts are included as a component of cash and cash
equivalents. A characteristic of such banking arrangements is that the bank balance often
fluctuates from being positive to overdrawn." Although Ind AS 7 permits bank overdrafts to
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.134
FINANCIAL REPORTING
be included as cash and cash equivalent, for the purpose of presentation in the balance
sheet, it would not be appropriate to include bank overdraft in the line item cash and cash
equivalents unless the netting off conditions as given in paragraph 42 of Ind AS 32, Financial
Instruments: Presentation are complied with.
Bank overdraft, in the balance sheet, will be included within financial liabilities. Just because
the bank overdraft is included in cash and cash equivalents for the purpose of Ind AS 7, does
not mean that the same should be netted off against the cash and cash equivalent balance in
the balance sheet. Instead Ind AS 7 requires a disclosure of the components of cash and
cash equivalent and a reconciliation of amounts presented in the cash flow statements.
Another element on account of which there could be difference between the cash and cash
equivalents presented in the balance sheet and the statement of cash flows is unrealised gains
or losses arising from changes in foreign currency exchange rates, which are not considered to
be cash flows. The following illustration would explain the issue:
Illustration 10
An entity has bank balance in foreign currency aggregating to USD 100 (equivalent to  4,500) at
the beginning of the year. Presuming no other transaction taking place, the entity reported a profit
before tax of 100 on account of exchange gain on the bank balance in foreign currency at the
end of the year. What would be the closing cash and cash equivalents as per the balance sheet?
Solution
For the purpose of statement of cash flows, the entity shall present the following:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.135
Reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents
If any changes in the policies take place, that will be dealt with as per the provisions of Ind AS 8.
*****
3.19 OTHER DISCLOSURES
An entity shall disclose, together with a commentary by management, the amount of significant
cash and cash equivalent balances held by the entity that are not available for use by the group.
There are various circumstances in which cash and cash equivalent balances held by an entity
are not available for use by the group. Examples include cash and cash equivalent balances
held by a subsidiary that operates in a country where exchange controls or other legal
restrictions apply when the balances are not available for general use by the parentor other
subsidiaries.
Additional information may be relevant to users in understanding the financial position and
liquidity of an entity. It may include:
1.
2.
3.
The amount of undrawn borrowing facilities that may be available for future operating
activities and to settle capital commitments, indicating any restrictions on the use of these
facilities.
The aggregate amount of cash flows that represent increases in operating capacity
separately from those cash flows that are required to maintain operating capacity it will help
the stakeholders to know whether entity is paying proper attention for maintenance also;
The amount of the cash flows arising from the operating, investing and financing activities
of each reportable segment (see Ind AS 108, Operating Segments). This will provide the
idea about the company as a whole as well as the various parts of the company and their
efficiencies.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.136
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 11
Following is the balance sheet of Kuber Limited for the year ended 31 March, 20X2
(in lacs)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.137
Additional Information:
(1)
Profit after tax for the year ended March 31, 20X2 - 4,450 lacs
(2)
Interim dividend paid during the year - 450 lacs
(3)
Depreciation and amortisation charged in the statement of profit and loss during the current
year are as under
(a)
Property, Plant and Equipment - 500 lacs
(b)
(4)
Intangible Assets - 20 lacs
During the year ended March 31, 20X2 two machineries were sold for  70 lacs. The
carrying amount of these machineries as on March 31, 20X2 is ₹60 lacs.
(5)
Income taxes paid during the year 105 lacs
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.138
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(6) Other non-current / current assets and liabilities are related to operations of Kuber Ltd. and
do not contain any element of financing and investing activities.
Using the above information of Kuber Limited, construct a statement of cash flows under indirect
method.
Solution
Statement of Cash Flows
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.139
Illustration 12
*****
The relevant extracts of consolidated financial statements of A Ltd. are provided below:
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
for the year ended 31st March 20X2
Particulars
Revenue
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Amount (in Lac)
12,380
3.140
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The below information is relevant for A Ltd Group.
1.
2.
A Ltd had spent 30 Lac on renovation of a building. A Ltd charged the entire renovation
cost to profit and loss account.
On 1st April 20X1, A Ltd acquired 100% shares in S Ltd, for cash of₹300 Lac. Fair value
of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed under the acquisition are as under:
3.
A Ltd.'s property, plant and equipment comprise the following:
A Ltd constructed a machine that is a qualifying asset and incurred construction costs of
 40 Lac that has been charged to other expenses. Of the interest cost of 110 Lac
charged to profit or loss statement, 10 Lac includes interest cost on specific borrowings
that need to be capitalized.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.141
4.
5.
Property, plant and equipment was sold at 630 Lac. Gain on disposal is adjusted against
operating expenses.
A Ltd. purchased 30% interest in an Associate (G Ltd) for cash on 1st April 20X1. The
associate reported profit after tax of 400 Lac and paid a dividend of 100 Lac for the
year.
Impairment test was conducted on 31st March 20X2. The following were impaired as
under:
The goodwill impairment relates to 100% subsidiaries.
Assume that interest cost is all paid in cash.
You are required to determine cash generated from operations for group reporting
purposes for the year ended 31st March 20X2.
Solution
Extracts of Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 31st March 20X2
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.142
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Working Notes:
1. Profit before tax
2. Changes in Trade Receivables
3.
Changes in Inventories
4. Changes in Trade Payables
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Amount in Lacs
Amount in Lacs
Amount in Lacs
Amount in Lacs
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.143
3.20 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'ITC Limited' for the
financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Cash Flow Statement'.
Cash Flow Statement for the year ended 31st March, 2022
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.144
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.145
Cash Flow Statement for the year ended 31st March, 2022
Notes:
1. The above Cash Flow Statement has been prepared under the "Indirect Method" as set out in Ind AS - 7 "Statement of Cash Flows"
2. CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS:
3. Cash and Cash Equivalents include Nil (2021-57.07 Crores) on acquisition of erstwhile Sunrise Foods Private Limited and its
two wholly owned subsidiaries.
4. Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities includes an amount of 340.96 Crores (2021-368.18 Crores) spent towards Corporate
Social Responsibility.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - 'ITC Limited')
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.146
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.21 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 7 VIS-À-VIS
AS 3
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.147
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.148
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
QUICK RECAP
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
Presentation of a statement of cash flows
Report cash flows (inflows and outflows) during the period
Classified as
3.149
Operating activities
These are the
principal revenue-
producing activities
of the entity other
than investing or
financing activities
Reporting
Under
direct
method
Whereby
major classes
of gross cash
Investing activities
Financing activities
Cash and cash equivalents
Investing activities
are the acquisition
and disposal of
long-term assets
It
and
other
investments
not
composition of the
contributed equity
comprises
cash
on
hand
&
included in cash
equivalents
and borrowings of
the entity
Financing activities
are activities that
result in changes
in the size and
Cash
Cash equivalents
Are
short-
Under indirect
method
Whereby profit or loss is
adjusted for
• non-cash transactions
receipts and
• any deferrals or accruals of
gross cash
payments are
disclosed
past or future operating
cash receipts or payments
• items of income or expense
associated with investing
or financing cash flows
Entities are encouraged to follow the direct
method. The direct method provides information
which may be useful in estimating future cash
flows and which is not available under the
indirect method.
demand
deposits
An entity shall report separately
major classes of gross cash
receipts and gross cash
payments arising from investing
and financing activities
Exception
term, highly
liquid
investments
Are
readily
convertible to
known
amounts of
cash
Are subject to
an
insignificant
risk
of
changes in
value
Are not for
investment
purposes
has a short
maturity of,
say, 3 months
or less from
the date of
acquisition
Equity investments are excluded from cash
equivalents
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.150
FINANCIAL REPORTING
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
Questions
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1.
Use the following data of ABC Ltd. to construct a statement of cash flows using the direct
and indirect methods:
(Amount in)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.151
2.
During the financial year 20X2 company ABC Ltd. declared and paid dividend of 2,500.
During 20X2, ABC Ltd. paid 46,000 in cash to acquire new fixed assets. The accounts
payable was used only for inventory. No debt was retired during 20X2.
From the following summary cash account of XYZ Ltd, prepare cash flow statement for the
year ended March 31, 20X1 in accordance with Ind AS 7 using direct method.
Summary of Bank Account for the year ended March 31, 20X1
3.
Z Ltd. has no foreign currency cash flow for the year 20X1. It holds some deposit in a bank
in the USA. The balances as on 31.12.20X1 and 31.12.20X2 were US\$ 100,000 and
US\$ 102,000 respectively. The exchange rate on December 31, 20X1 was US\$1 =  45.
The same on 31.12.20X2 was US\$1 = 50. The increase in the balance was on account of
interest credited on 31.12.20X2. Thus, the deposit was reported at 45,00,000 in the
balance sheet as on December 31, 20X1. It was reported at 51,00,000 in the balance
sheet as on 31.12.20X2. How these transactions should be presented in cash flow for the
year ended 31.12.20X2 as per Ind AS 7?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.152
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
5.
Company A acquires 70% of the equity stake in Company B on July 20, 20X1. The
consideration paid for this transaction is as below:
(a) Cash consideration of 15,00,000
(b) 200,000 equity shares having face of 10 and fair value of 15 per share.
On the date of acquisition, Company B has cash and cash equivalent balance of
2,50,000 in its books of account.
On October 10, 20X2, Company A further acquires 10% stake in Company B for cash
consideration of  8,00,000.
Advise how the above transactions will be disclosed/presented in the statement of cash
flows as per Ind AS 7.
Entity A acquired a subsidiary, Entity B, during the year. Summarised information from the
Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss and Balance Sheet is provided, together with
some supplementary information.
Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss
Consolidated balance sheet
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.153
Other information
All of the shares of entity B were acquired for 74,000 in cash. The fair values of assets
acquired and liabilities assumed were:
Prepare the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year 20X2, as per Ind AS 7.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Answers
3.154
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.
A.
DIRECT METHOD
B.
INDIRECT METHOD
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.155
Working Notes:
Fixed Assets Account
Inventory Account
Accounts Payable Account
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
3.156
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Equity Share Capital Account
XYZ Ltd.
Cash Flow Statement for the year ended March 31, 20X1 (Using the Direct Method)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.157
3.
4.
The profit and loss account was credited by
1,00,000 (US \$ 2,000 × ₹50) towards
interest income. It was credited by the exchange difference of US\$ 1,00,000 × (₹ 50 - ₹45)
that is,  500,000. In preparing the cash flow statement,  5,00,000, the exchange
difference, should be deducted from the 'net profit before taxes'. However, in order to
reconcile the opening balance of the cash and cash equivalents with its closing balance, the
exchange difference 5,00,000, should be added to the opening balance in note to cash
flow statement.
Cash flows arising from transactions in a foreign currency shall be recorded in Z Ltd.'s
functional currency by applying to the foreign currency amount the exchange rate between
the functional currency and the foreign currency at the date of the cash flow.
As per para 39 of Ind AS 7, the aggregate cash flows arising from obtaining control of
subsidiary shall be presented separately and classified as investing activities.
As per para 42 of Ind AS 7, the aggregate amount of the cash paid or received as
consideration for obtaining subsidiaries is reported in the statement of cash flows net of
cash and cash equivalents acquired or disposed of as part of such transactions, events or
changes in circumstances.
Further, investing and financing transactions that do not require the use of cash or cash
equivalents shall be excluded from a statement of cash flows. Such transactions shall be
disclosed elsewhere in the financial statements in a way that provides all the relevant
information about these investing and financing activities.
As per para 42A of Ind AS 7, cash flows arising from changes in ownership interests in a
subsidiary that do not result in a loss of control shall be classified as cash flows from
financing activities, unless the subsidiary is held by an investment entity, as defined in
Ind AS 110, and is required to be measured at fair value through profit or loss. Such
transactions are accounted for as equity transactions and accordingly, the resulting cash
flows are classified in the same way as other transactions with owners.
Considering the above, for the financial year ended 31st March, 20X2 total consideration of
 15,00,000 less 250,000 will be shown under investing activities as "Acquisition of the
subsidiary (net of cash acquired)".
There will not be any impact of issuance of equity shares as consideration in the cash flow
statement however a proper disclosure shall be given elsewhere in the financial statements
in a way that provides all the relevant information about the issuance of equity shares for
non-cash consideration.
Further, in the statement of cash flows for the year ended 31st March, 20X3, cash
consideration paid for the acquisition of additional 10% stake in Company B will be shown
under financing activities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.158
FINANCIAL REPORTING
5. This information will be incorporated into the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows as
follows:
Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 20X2 (extract)
Working Notes:
1.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 7
3.159
2. Calculation of change in Trade Receivables during the year
Total trade receivables of the Group at the end of the year
Trade receivables acquired during the year from subsidiary
Opening trade receivables
Decrease in trade receivables
3. Calculation of change in Trade Payables during the year
Trade payables at the end of the year
Trade payables of the subsidiary assumed during the year
Opening trade payables
Decrease in trade payables
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
₹
54,000
(8,000)
46,000
50,000
4,000
₹
68,000
(32,000)
36,000
60,000
24,000
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
