Ind As 111- Joint Arrangements
J
↓
Definition
Joint Control
Typer of Joint
④ Accounting for
Arrangement
Joint Operation
Definition
of JA
2 or more parties
Joint Control (unanimous Decision Making)
Contractual Agreement
Eg:
Unanimous Decision Making (Exception)
(eg: 4 partics)
→ If the contract states that, out of 4 partiel, 3 parties can get the resolution approved &
if the combination of portice required to approve is
Joint Arrangement between those 3 partice.
specified,
Then it will be a
This is
a Joint Arrangement
Bul only Between A, B & D.
This is
a
Joint Arrangement
But only Between A, B, C
# Intg 4 Any 3 parties can achieve to%, But the combination of 3 parties who
are
pree was not mentioned/implied.
required to agree
Joint Arrangement
4 it was NOT a
plied... In eg 4
3. Types of Joint Arrangement
√
Joint Operation [J]
3 Definitions (Any 1)
1. JA IS NOT Structured through
a
Separate legal entity.
(It will be a Joint operation)
↓
 OR?
2. J.A is structured through a
separate legal entity & each
parties have rights & obligations
to individual asses & uabilities
↓
COR
3. J. A is structured through a
Separate legal entity  whole
output from sep. legal entity is
only for parties to the arrangement
& NOT for outside $3^{rd}$ party
الا
eg
4
Joint Venture (IV]
Only I $\mathfrak{D}ef^{n}$
JA is structured
through a Sep. legal entity
partid have sights in
Net Accels.
(not individual arsels  Liab)
↓
 .
Extra Def":
Sep legal entity
output (Not only for own parties
But allo for $3^{rd}$ parties)
Eg
for construction
They decided to come
together te farm
a Joint Arrangement $(AK\rightarrow50\%$, Rahul 50%)
& then they will apply for this Gout contract (But they Did NOT form
↓
a New Co.)
Joint operation (Def Reference Point 1)
EgQ
AK Hd
J
( ) Rahul Hd
Raw Material
procurement
Construction
(+)
Cheap labour
Sep legal Entity
Eg 3:
د
AKRA Hd (Newco.)
Ak
Net Assets
= Ascets
Lieb
Rahul
Same as Eg
 But the parties have rights directly in Net Assels  not individual Assel  
Liab
→ J.V (sep legal entity ( ) Rights in Net Assets)
Eg 4
ICA I Office (Mum Bai)
Gujrat (Surat)
HP Petrol Pump
Indian Oil Petrol Pomp
Common Pipeline
for transportation
of Petrol
HP Petrol
Pomp
Extra Discussion
→
1st case
HPIO Hd
pipeline
can be
wsed by
used
HP Hp 10 by
3rd
party
Indian Oil
petrd pump
and case
HPIO IHd
Pipeline
HP
10
Can sell Petrol
HP  IO JA
J
Sep. legal entity
(HPIO)
to their customers
3rd porty)
Pipeline
It is only for
consumption of
parties
JO
③
(4
S
Oral Test
Infosys & Reliance →
→
←
together No sep. legal entity  
n
n
n
Sep. legal entity
(Individual casset & Liab)
Sep. legal entity J.V.
(Net Assels)
Sep. legal cutity
(Common Accel)
Cont
 only for use by parties
Sep. legal entity
(Common Acsel)
For use by (4) 3rd party
parties
n
JV
Sep. legal cutity
(Common Assel)
 Only for use by
parties
→JO
 canot be used by by $3^{rd}$ , party
These porticed cau seal
the output to $3^{rd}$ parties
LDR
Question 2 (RTP May'22) (MTP May'23)
10
JY
Identify the type of joint arrangements in each of the following scenarios:
(ii)
L or more parties
unanimous Dec makd.
X Ltd and Y Ltd, manufacturing similar type of mobile phones, form a joint arrangement to manufacture
and sell mobile phones. Under the terms of the arrangement, both X Ltd and Y Ltd are to use their own
assets to manufacture the mobile phones and both are responsible for liabilities related to their
respective manufacture. The arrangement also lays down the distribution revenues from the sale of the
mobile phones and expenses incurred thereof. X Ltd however has exclusive control over the marketing
and distribution functions and does not require the consent of Y Ltd in this aspect. No separate entity
is created for the arrangement. unanimous Dec. MakIX Joint Arrangement x
Continuing with (i) above, what would be the classification of the joint arrangement if X Ltd and Y Ltd
both jointly control all the relevant activities of the Joint arrangement including the marketing and the
distribution functions?
Joint Op. (No Sep legal entity)
(iii) What would be the classification of the joint arrangement if under the terms of the arrangement, a
separate entity is created to manufacture the mobile phones.
Fo
JX
Rigis Individual Aseels &  JO.
•Rights Net Assels
J.V
(iv) Continuing with (iii) above, the joint arrangement is a means of manufacturing mobile phones on a
common platform but the output of the joint arrangement is purchased by both X Ltd and Y Ltd in the
ratio of 50:50. The joint arrangement cannot sell output to third parties. The price of the output sold to
31.11
#FRwithAK
CA Aakash Kandoi
CA Final - Financial Reporting
IND AS 111
X Ltd and Y Ltd is set by both the parties to the arrangement to cover the production costs and other
administrative costs of the joint arrangement entity. JO (Common Assel) use only by own portic.
(v) Would your answer in (iv) above be different if X Ltd and Y Ltd sold their respective share of output to
<
X
}
 24
third parties? Common Asset
(JA)
seeling to customers 10.
(vi) Assume that in (iv) above, the contractual terms of the arrangement were modified so that the joint
arrangement entity is not obliged to sell the output to X Ltd and Y Ltd but was able to sell the output to
third parties.
Solution:
JA
 
]
3rd party
JV (Extro Defin
(7 Marks)
4. Accounting of Joint Arrangement
Joint Operation
NO CFS applicable
tach party will record
their share of Assels/Lab/
Incomes/Expenses.
in SFS itself
SFS
4
Ind As 27
Inust in J.V XX
cost
FV
Joint Veuture.
CFS
ル
Ind As 28
Equity
Method
Inust in Associate
& Joint Venture.
IndAs III
↓
Proportionate
Consolidation
Illus 21
Ind AS 111
J-A
J  (sep legal entity (+) Individual asset & Liab $(ligub)$
Proportionate consolidation
LOR
Illustration 22 - Accounting of interest in joint operation (RTP - May 2020)
AB Limited and BC Limited establish a joint arrangement through a separate vehicle PQR, but the legal form
of the separate vehicle does not confer separation between the parties and the separate vehicle itself. Thus,
both the parties have rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities of PQR. As neither the contractual
terms nor the other facts and circumstances indicate otherwise, it is concluded that the arrangement is a joint
operation and not a joint venture.
Both the parties own 50% each of the equity interest in PQR. However, the contractual terms of the joint
arrangement state that AB Limited has the rights to all of Building No. 1 owned by PQR and the obligation to
pay all of the debt owed by PQR to a lender XYZ. AB Limited and BC Limited have rights to all other assets
in PQR, and obligations for all other liabilities of PQR in proportion of their equity interests (i.e. 50% each).
PQR's balance sheet is as follows (all amounts in INR):
How should AB Ltd. record in its financial statements its rights and obligations in PQR?
Solution:
Under Ind AS 111, AB Ltd. should record the following in its financial statements, to account for its rights in
the assets of PQR and its obligations for the liabilities of PQR.
Assets
Cash
Building 1 *
Building 2
Liabilities
Debt (third party) ^
Employee benefit plan obligation
#FRwithAK
CA Final - Financial Reporting
Equity
₹
20
240.
100
240
50
CA Aakash Kandoi
31.8
IND AS 111
70
Ques 25 (LOR)
J-O
J.O Defn Alcing Proportionate consolidation
Ind As Ill J.A
Alpha 50%-
Gamma so%
$J_{\cdot V}\rightarrow Def^{n}$
i) PPE
Total cost
on 30/09/17
(+) 6m Interest Capitalised (Ind AS 23)
(114/17 10 30/09/17)
=
40 crores
0.5 crores
$(10cr\times10\%\times\frac{6}{12})$
30/09/17 Cost
40.5 crores
$\frac{less:6mDeprn(\frac{40~Serores\times l_{4r}\times6m}{12m}).\frac{(1\cdot o12s~erorel)}{daqr}.$
A 50%
31/3/18
39.4875 crores
 50%
A 50%
ii) $\underline{Depm}(6m)=1.0125$
G 50%
A 50%
ii) Remaining 6m Interest $(PI_{0})=0.5~crores$
G 50%
OFU
12m Int
 Cap
6m (PIL
iv) Maintenance $cost(PIL)\rightarrow4~cokW$
A 50%
 50%
Note: In Exam present the above in statement format.
loan
501-
}
50%
ICAI did not discurs
Illus 23 (LDR)
JO
sale
A
J-O
CA 100
SP 80
Before Sale
A Itd
Asset 100%-
After sale
J.O
60% stake
A Hd
Asset 100%-
Ascel @ 60%
J-E. Cin the the Books of Alld)
(Effective sale 40%)
CIB ALC Dя
32
(80x40%)
loss on Sale (PLL) DB  8
TO Asset (@CA) 40 $(100\times40\%)$
A 60%-
other
porty 40%
Ef fective
Sale
40%-
Illur 24 (LDR)
A
Pur chase
J O-
JE In the Books of Altd
effective purchase 40%
Asset (PPE) Alc DS 32
TO CIB ALIC
$(80\times40\%)$
(No Gain/loss on
32
purchase)
cost
JO
A→ 60%
Other
Porty
 40%
83 (LDR)
OFU
Entity A
Given up Property
FV
 110
CA
100
Intangible 10
Asset
Fy
Entity B
Given up Equipment 120
CA
80
JE
Mote: J.E Not asked: con present the above in table / statement format.
 ) Special case
Acquisition of further stake from existing party of Joint operation / Acquisition of
stake in a
د
existing joint operation
we will follow Business combination Accounting (6 steps of Acquisition Method)
for acquisition of stake in a Joint operation.
$Pg~29.49\rightarrow JndAs~103$
Illus 53 (Ind
Ind AS 103+
 )
→ LOR
Note: In illus wherever it is mentioned that it is joint venture, it should be written
joint operation instead.
minetuer it is a Buin or Asset Acquisition
-Refer & B
⑥ Determine Date of Acq
→ 30.06.x1 (Govt Approval
wal essential Dave of receipt of
Such approval will be considered as DOA.
Business Combination Accounting for Acquisition of stake in Joint Operation
waise Y ne blu 66.67% acquire kiya hal, but
uska pucha nalut hai
Step Id the acquirer Company  Itd.
$Step(2)\underline{DOA}-30|06|X|$
$Slep(33)\underline{pc(33.337)\rightarrow1.00,000$
Assets af 2 @Fair valve (except cash) 950000
Step INA of z Hd
 viab of z
E DTL (WN)
Proportionate Consolidation (33.33%)
(5,00,000)
(90000)
Total INA of 2 (100%) 360000
Y's share in 2's INA (33.33%) 119988
Steps NCL X
Cove
are only doing proportionale consolidation by taking
over only
proportionate INA: NO NCI)
O E (Cap. Reserve)
③Journal entry
OFU 2 Assets (33.33%) AMC Da
To 2 Vab
Alc
$10~DIL(33.33\%)$
(33.33%)
$TOPC(33.33x)\rightarrow10000$
TO OBP
BIS
$\underline{OF4}\times fuuu+2(33.33x)$
(LFS
ESC TOE  only  ) 
Draft Bls (Imp Items of BNS)
$corh(x+z)(-1,00,000$
$0\cdot E(Add~OBp)$
$D\pi(90k\times33\cdot33\%)$ 29997
Cons Bls of Company  as at 30.06.x1
