IND AS 21→
The effects of changes in Foreign
Exchange Rates
Jump
1. Scope
2. Types of
3. Functional
4. Accounting for foreign
Currency
Currency
Currency transactions
J
A-Initial
8. Mon vs
C. Subsequent
Recog
Meas
Non-Mon
item
5. Presentation currency
other than
functional
currency
 
Translating FS into
Presentation currency
8. Intra Group
Transactions
6. Foreign
Operation
↓
7. Translation of
foreign
Functional
operations
Currency
of
foreign ap.
↓
9. Goodwill
10. Disposal of
foreign
Operation
11. Diff in
Rep.
Dares
12. Tax Effect on
Exchange
Ind As 21
* Types of currency
 Foreign currency Other than functional currency
**
*(Main)
 Functional currency Currency of Primary Economic Environment
→
Indicators Primary
Refer concept Book.
Secondary
3 Presentation currency
☐
Currency in which FS are presented.
за
us ltd (10)
Paveut \$
ل
For CFS
Functional
Foreign
Currency
Currency
Ak itd Subs
(Indian (0)
"
FS\$ mein banakr deva
Transactione in
foreign
currency
 : Yash Hd (Indian Co.)
→ Functional currency""
Purchased a
padega to pareut for as
purpose
madinery worth \$ 1 lakhs as on 01.09.X1 on credit.
Rate on 01/09/x1 = 275/4, 31/3/x2280/4. Ignore Deprn.
Soln: Day 01/09/21 Machinery Alc De
275 Lakhs
75 lakhs
To Creditors (Trade Payables)
$($
Irend
Mallinery
Non-monetary
Not remeatured.
ur end Creditors
Extracts
 Monetary
Remeasured at closing rate
rate @780/\$.
J-E 31/3/x2
 
PIL (Ex loss) ARC DR
Slakly
To Creditors
 lakhs.
$(91~bkus\times775/9-780/f)$
Summary for Accounting of foreign warency transactions
Initial Measurement
→
Monetary  Non-Monetary Rate
on Date of Transaction
Subsequent
Measurement
(Arend)
Monetary item
↓
Remeasure @closing rate
介
Ex Diff Trf to PIL
Corried @cost Model
No need to Remeasure
nega
No Exchange Diff
*
Non Monetary item
Carried or Revaluation
Model
T
Remeasure @Erch Rate
on the date of Revalvation
Fair value Goin/loss  
Ex Gain/loss  
Exchange Diff
$FVGlL\rightarrow P/_{L}$
Ex GIL PIL
Eg2 Non- Monetary @Revalvation Model
PPE purchased on 011091 1 for \$ I lakus on credit.
Fair value on arend is \$1.1 lakus. Co. follows Rev. Medel.
Ex. Rate on 01/09/1275/4
Ex. Rave on 31/3/42-28014
Solm:
01/09/×1
7752
Machinery
To Creditors
$(\div11aku\times75/s)$
2752
31/3/12 Macwine Alc  .
 750000
TO Rev. Gain (OUENR)
7750000
31/3/2 Machine All De
550000
To Ex Gain (out NR)
F550000
Trend Machine cis Bal
= 88 lakus $(7sL+7sL+s\cdot sL)$
Illus 12 (LDR)
Journal entries
30/01/
""
Machinery Alc Dя 3,00,000
To Creditors Alc
3,00,000
$(45000\times760/s)$
31/3/21 Ex 1085 (PIL) ALC DS, 25,000
To Creditors
$(\$s000\times765/4-...860/\$)$
25,000
31/3/1 Maut All De
To Reval Gain COLI-NR) ALL
$(4ss00(-1\$~s000)\times760/s$
230,000
230,000
(Because we want only
27500
27500
31/31x1   De
21/3/1
Fu Gain)
To Exchange Gan (OLE-MR) ALC
$(45500\times(765/4-760/5)$
FV
OCT (MR) All De
TO DIL ALC
17250
17250
Yreuded 31/31x2
Creditors All Da. 325000
PIL CEX loss) Da
10000
$T0~CIB(\$s000\times767/9)$ 335000
31/31x2 $Maulew^{Y}\rightarrow FV$ same : No Fair Valve Goun
CUN For Machinery
FV on 31/3/x1→
357500
Fair valuation is
performed But No Four value Grain Fyon 31
31/3/72
→
368500
$(\$SS00\times\mp671q)$
31/3/x2 Mamy Mc De
11000
unchanged Total Gran 11000
To Exchange Gam (QLF-MR) ALC
11000
Fy Crain
NU
Ex Gain
11000
(\$5500 $(765/4-76+/4)$
21/3/X2 OCE (NR) ALL DA
3300
TO DIL
3300
Note: Whenever Non- Mon Asset is
Booked at Fair Valve on that
date, Ex GIL is to be computed.
DT on Creditous  ICAI did not discuss so we also
WN For DT Con Machinery)
No Fv/Ex Gain
in Tax
Machinery
31/3/1
CA
T-B
357500
300000
$(3l+30k+27500)$
ignored
Diff
\$7500
Reason Ex Gain  Fu Gain
(04-NR)
DT.@30%
17250 (DTL)
OCT ALL De
TO OTL
21/3/12
368500
300000
68500
20550
1 in DTL
3300
Eg: CInventories- Cost/NRV)
On 01/09/1 Inventory purchased @\$1000 Rate on 01/09/1 27014
31/3/x2 MRV is \$990, rate on 31/31×2  775/\$
WEN
Inventory Cost $(\$1000\times770/\Phi)=70,000$
Trend
NRU $(\$990\times775/8)=\underline{74250}$
Note: For NRV in  , multiply by
exchange rate on date of NRY.
lower of cost or NRV i e- @cost (270000)
Note: Even if NRV in  was lower than cost, we will compare cost & NRY after
converting into our functional currency ie Z
Carrying Aur
Eg: PPE Impairment Test
Recoverable Aut
}
Same
Cexample
as NRY.
in concept notes)
Translation of FS into Presentation currency
Cog: Day to Day trawactione recorded in functional currency ( ),
But FS required to be submitted in &→
why?
Note: (P12 P12 P12 Dont chock Monetary / Non-Monetary here]→ This is TRANSLATION
we check Monetary) Non-Monetary during foreign currency TRANSACTIONS
Exchange Diff on Translation of FS
FCTR (Foreign currency Translation Reserve)
OCI (R)
Accumulate in other Equity.
Illus 11 (LOR)
ⅰ) Translation of FS Cuso
Assels
Prop, Plaut Eq
Retables
USD
L\$
1013
(\$)
50000?
USD
Rate
L\$
50000
1.13
56502 44248
$(\frac{5000}{1\cdot13})$
935000
1013
827434
871682
Equ
Labilities
Equity
(FCTR)
Taul
Foreign currency translation Reserve (OLI(R)  ) (Gain)
24376
OR
Asset
side is 1 Gam
871682
If they
were at
closing
Diff 24376 approx
rate
* Foreign operation
fareut
India (2)
Functional
Currency""
→ Subs
US
(\$)
Jv China ( )
Associate - Dubai (Dirhums)
$Branch=Japan(Jap~\forall)$
Foreign operation
↓
Functional currency of
indicatas
(reter Concept Book)
foreign operation
rare
Different from
Same as Pareut
Parent
↓
Translation of FS
Translation of
not required
FS of F.O is
required.
 Translating FS of FO into functional currency of Parent
J
Rules
→ Same as
Point above.
LDR Question 4- (MTP Nov'21)
Pareut
GBP
1007-
Subs
Subs
ts funct
PQR Holdings Limited is based in London and has Pound sterling ("GBP") as its functional and
presentation currency. On 1st April, 20X1, PQR Holdings Limited incorporated PQR India Limited as its
wholly owned subsidiary in India. PQR India will be engaged in trading of items purchased from PQR
Holdings. The shares of PQR India, having a face value of 10 each amounting to total of 500 crore,
were issued to PQR Holdings in GBP on 1st April, 20X1.
CA Final - Financial Reporting
IND AS 21
PQR India has adopted Ind AS with effect from its incorporation. In accordance with Ind AS, management
of PQR India has concluded that its functional currency is Indian Rupee ("INR"). Following is the
summarized trial balance of PQR India as on 31st March, 20X2, being the reporting date of PQR India and
PQR Holdings:
(Note: All amounts in the below mentioned trial balance are in crore)
GBP
0123
500
S. No.
Particulas
Debit
Credit
Rate
GBP
Balances
Balances
1.
Share capital
→ Non-Monetary
500.0
0-0123
6.15
2.
Securities premium reserve on issue of equity shares Non Mon
150.0
→0.0123
3.
Retained earnings
Non mon.
110.0
0.0116
4.
Long-term borrowings
Mon
30.0
5.
Deferred tax liability
Non-Mon
10.0
6.
All Asset
Uabs
Income tax payable
Mon
25.0
7.
Import duty payable
Mon
5.0
@cus Rute
8.
Employee benefits payable
Mon
7.5
1.2.
9.
Sundry trade payables
→ Mon
2.5
0.0109
10.
Property, plant and equipment (net of depreciation) Non 550.0
Mon
11.
Computer software (net of amortisation)  Nor Mon
70.0
12.
Inventories purchased on 15th March, 20X2
200.0
(there is no indicator of impairment)
Non Mon
13.
Cash and bank balance mon
5.0
14.
CA
Sundry trade receivables
→Mon
17.0
Total
15.Allowance for doubtful trade receivables Mon.
Additional information relating to property, plant and equipment, and computer software:
2.0
842.0 842.0
Line item
Property, plant and equipment
Computer software
Date of acquisition
30th April, 20X1
}
Because here we are
irrelevant doin
doing translation.
5th May, 20X1
Allasser @cis
PQR India has adopted the following accounting policy in relation to shareholders' funds to translate equity:
rate.
Share capital
To be translated using historical exchange rate
This Co. was in in corporated
 
on
Securities premium
Retained earnings
To be translated using historical exchange rate
To be translated using average exchange rate
meane rate of 01/04/x1
Since the presentation currency of PQR Holdings is GBP, PQR India is required to translate its trial balance
from INR to GBP. Following table provides relevant foreign exchange rates:
Closing spot rate as on 1st April, 20X1 opr Rave
Closing spot rate as on 30th April, 20X1 x
Closing spot rate as on 5th May, 20X1
Closing spot rate on 15th March, 20X2
Closing spot rate as on 31st March, 20X2  Rove
Average exchange rate for the year ended 31st March, 20X2
$1~INR=0.0123~GBP$
$1~INR=0.0120~GBP$
$1~INR=0.0119~GBP$
$1~INR=0.0108~GBP$
$1~INR=0.0109~GBP$
$1~INR=0.0116~GBP$
As the accountant of PQR India, you are required to do the following for its separate financial statements:
#FRwithAK
CA Aakash Kandoi
12.16
CA Final - Financial Reporting
IND AS 21
a) Explain the principle of monetary and non-monetary items.
Based on this principle, bifurcate the line
items of the trial balance into monetary and non-monetary items.
Translate the trial balance of PQR India from INR to GBP.
Solution:
 Not to be done Based on monetary & non-monetary
(14 Marks)
a) Monetary items are units of currency held and assets and liabilities to be received or paid in a fixed or
determinable number of units of currency. Para 15 of Ind AS 21 states that the essential feature of a
monetary item is a right to receive (or an obligation to deliver) a fixed or determinable number of units
of currency. Similarly, a contract to receive (or deliver) a variable number of the entity's own equity
instruments or a variable amount of assets in which the fair value to be received (or delivered) equals a
fixed or determinable number of units of currency is a monetary item.
Conversely, the essential feature of a non-monetary item is the absence of a right to receive (or an
obligation to deliver) a fixed or determinable number of units of currency.
On the basis of above principles, the line items of trial balance should be bifurcated as follows:
As per para 38 of Ind AS 21, an entity may present its financial statements in any currency (or currencies).
If the presentation currency differs from the entity's functional currency, it translates its results and financial
position into the presentation currency. For example, when a group contains individual entities with different
functional currencies, the results and financial position of each entity are expressed in a common currency
so that consolidated financial statements may be presented.
(b) Translation of the balances for the purpose of consolidation
#FRwithAK
CA Aakash Kandoi
12.17
CA Final - Financial Reporting
E90-
IND AS 21
Lab
Question 5 (RTP Nov'23)
Infotech Global Ltd. (a stand-alone entity) has a functional currency of USD and needs to translate its
financial statements into the presentation currency (INR). The following is the draft financial statements of
Infotech Global Ltd. prepared in accordance with its functional currency.
#FRwithAK
Balance Sheet
Statement of Profit and Loss
CA Aakash Kandoi
12.18
In Quel 4 above (Parent 100%, NCI→0%)
The Bal in FCTR on Translation of Fs of Subs
Bir fur cate
Between
Pareur
NCI
Profit
h
less
ル
Show under Add/less to the
E
FCTR
Bal of
NCI
#
eg. Fs of Subs Translate FCTR = 150
Pareut (70%)
105
Other Eq
FCTR
(Parent 70%, NC 30%)
$\frac{NG(301)}{45}$
Add to NCI's Balance
Quel 5 CLOR
Balance Sheet
Other Comprelleusive Income
Cy
Py
INR
Exchange diff (FCTR Cy. Bal) (638015 (1) 492000)
 
146015
Statement of changes in Equity
* Intra Group Transactions (Between Parent & Subsidiary
↓
Refer concept book foreg.
€
Bls 313.x2
Asser
\$
loan to Sub 100
$\$100x\in21f=\epsilon200$
(€150)
 of in liah (50)
DE Ex Loss (PIL)
SO
Extrack
To loan from P SO
Bis
PIL
Vab f
loan from P 200
Ex locs  
So
SFS
For CFS purpose translate Subs FS into \$.
Treatment of Ex Grain/loss in Inter Co. Transaction $(P-S$
[s
CFS
↓
One Line Summany : (CFS) (Ex CGIL) Not eliminate
Only I case
EXGILOCE (R) ie loan not returnable
$Au\oplus Her~cab~as\rightarrow E\times GlL~plL\rightarrow$
Illur 8 LUDR)
M
Sales
t
G
CFS Pareut ' ' Bis
WNI Inventory valve €
Rate
$\mathbb{Z}^{\prime}$
Cost
12L
83
996
Translated valve
is alsumed
MRV (Assumed) 121
85
1020
NRV DY ICHI.
 
CFS J-E CURP elimination)
Cove PIL
166
To Inventory
166
 Disposal of Subs / Asse  JV & reclassification of Bal in FCTR on disposal
OCI (R) Accumulated in O.E fareut's share.
NLE Share Add to NCI Balance.
(FCTP)
Σ
why Pll
Because
we had
Booked in
OCE(R)
reclassify
to PIL
FCTR
merm
Full disposal
Reclassify full
Disposal of Assc   etc. (other than Subs)
Bal in FOTR to PIL
J
J-E (Assowing Grain
FCTR ALC Da
TO PIL
in FLTR)
(Reclassification entry)
(with loss of control)
b
- Reclassify Parent's share
waree bhi
sirf
pareut ka
he
share
pada hai
in FCTR to PIL
Disposal of Subs
Partial disposal.
Reclassify proportionate
Bal of FCTR to PIL.
 without loss of
th
coutrol)
PReclassify Proportional
Beel of FOTR to NCE
Daveet NIT
Before 701.
30%.
10%↑
Dispose (10%)
 
Prop. FCTR
reclassify/
transfer
to
NOI
31/3/19 Creditors Monetary - Remeasure @cis hate
Creditors Alc Do
61
TO Ex Gain
61
$(q21\times768/q-765/q)$
Macwnery Nen Monetary Not remeasured. (Cost Model)
31/3/18 Depre
850000
TO Madline
850000
$(136e\times\frac{14r}{4ur}\times\frac{3m}{12m})$
PPE Bad on $r~eud=136L-8.5L=127.5L$
Conclusion: CFO's contention
Incorred ( ) Give concept of men & Non Mon
Illut 14 (LDR)
01/01/19
Adv
\$ 20m
E
01/01/19 CIB ALC DS
Monetart
-To Ady Revenue Alc
Non-Monetary (\$20mx  7214)
✓
Paisa return nalli
Karna, good
deliver karna hai
1440 m
1440 m
Not Remeasured (Mon Monetary)
31/3/191) Adv Revenue
1440
TO Revenue
1440
Bol \$30m iⅱ) Rezable
2250
Accrue
TO Revenue
2250
$(430m\times275/s)$
Total
$Rerenwe=3690$
1440 + 2250
01/04/19
31/3/18
Bal \$ 30m
received
Revenue Accrue
\$ som
Illue 15 (LOR)
i) Cal of Glw
PC (701) € 17.5m
(+) NCI (30%) € 6.9m
(-) INA (100%) (€23m)
GW €1.4m
 
IMA ALC Da 23m
(PSNA  23m x 301)
GW
(1.4m)
TO NOT
6.9m
TO PC
17-5
Glo 31/031x2
$t1.4m\times284/t=2117.6m$
Closing rate
all asset trab
taken over in Buln Comb"
Cincluding  ) are translated
at els rate in CFS on areud
it) Refer Q-B
Illus 16 (LOR) $(F\cdot I+dl)$
Step Cash flows $(m)$
Day
1-6
6Mar
Fr. Cost
GOL (FCY) in flow(-) 21 (Fey) outflow
$G(Fey)$ out How coupon
60L + Premium Repayment
Awit missing?
Step@
 FV OF FL (NO CI
NO CFI, No Pre-exists relation. No level I
$Fv~of~FC=T\cdot Pt)Tr\cdot cost$
$=60L+3L$
$=crc(FCy)$
Step $E1R=12Y.$
Assume
 input) = FV of
FL
=
end
TP-TC
145-3432
Actual els
162.14
Ain Fh
16-7968 (Ex loss)
J-E. Ex loss $(P10)$ 16-7968
TO FL
16-7968
Geun-Dre
loss- IDIL Reversal
14-15
15-16
Ple
X
Bls as on dalto
Eq
  E (FeTR) opn 1.4
14752
15-164
2
our
FCTR Gain
During the yr 1-4
20
DTL 30%.
2
(0-6) 1.4
Lidb
→
DTL opn $\phi-6$
( ) During the ur
0.6
1.2
On Sale of Inust
FCTR Reclassify to PIL
1.4
Dr Balance Reverse to PIL
0-6
JE
FCTR ALC De
1-4
DIL Reveue
0.6
TO PIL
104
TO PIL
0.6
Summary of Treatment of EX GIL
Foreign Curr. TRANSACTIONS
Intial Meas Mon & Non-Mon Rate on Date of Transaction
Subs Meas (arena)
↓
Monetary item
介
Cis hate
Ex Diff
→PIL
Carried at Cost Model
小
No need to Remeasure
NO Exch GIL
Non- Monetary item.
Carried at her Model
ル
Remeasured Exch. Rate
on the date of Revaln.
Exchange Diff
Translation of FS into Presentation
↓
Ex GIL on Translation of FS
OCE (R) Accumulate in O.E
Currency.
All Assek,
& Gab
Eq
OE
opn
opn}
@cus Rate
During
Given/Historical
the ur Profit
Rate
 Aug
Rate.
Treatment of Ex Gain/loss in Inter Co. Transaction (P s
S
SP]
CFS
SFS
Ex Goun /loss
on foreign
currency transaction
ال
PIL
Inter Co.
transacion
results in
Trade receivables
५
Inter Co. Transaction
loan given & loan
taken
Trade payable
Cinau
cases)
↓
loan is Returnable
loan is Not
T-R & T-P eliminate
Sales & Purchase
→ eliminate
along with URP
Ex Gain lloss Not eliminated
CFS (PIL)
loan given & loan taken
eliminate
↓
Ex Gain lloss
in CFS
Returnable in
future
Core 
ofu Pareut
L Imist in
Sub
Sub-Cap Courn from
→ Not eliminated cre→
CFS (PIL)
Y
Parent)
loan given
&
loan taken
eliminated
eliminated)
If nothing mentioned in ques Ex Gain loss (Not
assume that ban is returnable (FS (  OCI (R)
(in forseeable future)
