Ind As 101- First time adoption
Smarks ques
[Pief shores
AS- Eq
Mandatory exceptions and
. Optional exemptions
The general principle of Ind AS 101:
customer related intangibles, SBP with non-emp.
Def tax on laud
An entity shall, in its opening Ind AS Balance sheet:
☑
Ind AS, CFT, Eg, Liab
Proposed div, Internally generated intangible
✓ Recognise all assets and liabilities whose recognition is required by Ind AS.
✓ Not recognise items as assets or liabilities if Ind AS do not permit such recognition.
For example, Ind AS 115, has different thresholds for revenue recognition as compared
to AS 9 under Indian GAAP and hence an item that is recognized as a trade receivable
in Indian GAAP, may not be so recognized under Ind AS;
NCE if in As it was
Shown outside eq.
Discounting
Reclassify items that it recognised in accordance with previous GAAP as one type of
asset, liability or component of equity, but are a different type of asset, liability or
component of equity in accordance with Ind AS.
For example, Ind AS requires classification of assets given on operating lease as
investment property whereas the same are presented as property, plant and
equipment under Indian GAAP; and
Apply Ind AS in measuring all recognised assets and liabilities.
of long term prou,
For example, Ind AS has well-defined measurement principles for financial assets and
Measuremer of FAI Fiabilities, like certain investments are measured at fair value under Ind AS, whereas
Measurement of
the same are measured at lower of cost and fair value under Indian GAAP.
Def Tax Based on BIS Approach
* Optional Exemptions/Mandatory Exceptious
* Optional Exemption
1) Deemed cost for PPE, Intangible Asset & Invct Prop
For PPE, Intangible Asset
Option 1: Apply Ind As from the
For Inust Prop
Option 1&2
Available
date of purchase & compute volve
as on Date of Transition
FV-Deemed Not Availabl
Cost
$(eg$
DOT: 01.04.26
PPE acquire 0104.21)
Ind AS   21
valve on 01.04.26
as per Ind As.
Option 2: Carrying Anet
as per Prev GAAP (AS)
as on date of Transition will become
Deemed cost for Ind AS.
 eg: DOT
DOT 01.04.26
As
ASCA = 10L
Ind And $cost=10t)$
Option 3: Fair value of PDE, I.A as an date of
Transition will become Deemed cost for Ind AS
(eg. DOT 01-04-26
AS
→
CA
FOL
FV
121
IndAS (Deemed $loct)=12L$
Jay
Indas 21
2) Cumulative
Translation Difference (As 11)
AS11
FCTR (Foreign currency
Translation Reserve)
Option 1: Reset to zero
(Trf to Retained
Earnings)
Option 2: Apply Ind As 21 retrospectively
Para 46/46A
loss on
(foreign exch gain/less
long term loan taken)
Option
tion 1
Reset to zero
Option 2 Apply Ind As 21 retrospectively
Option 3 Continue following As 11
Note: If Para 46/46A coal NOT opted before in As. then company cannot opt it
now in Ind As (neither prospectively / nor rehospectively)
Compound Financial Instruments
(AS- Only Financial Liab)
Fin liab is ols on
Fin liab (NOT) outstanding on Date of Transition
Date of Transition
Retrospectively apply
Ind As 109, e find the
valve of FL & Eq on
Date of Transition
No need to split
J-E Old Fe Ale
Do
(@Cary Aure)
TO New FL
To New Eq
(Diff tot to R.E)
 
xx
④ Share Bored Payment (No AS- Only Guidance Note)
Vested
options
(vpover, only shares
Onvested
options (VP is Not over yet)
issue pending)
Only I option
FV (As per Ind As 102)
Option 1: Continue Prev GAAP valve
Option 2: FV (As per Ind As 102)
Prev CAAP Esop
100
Fu (Judas)
121
Unvested
SBP Rele ILL
Ind AS 27
⑤ Inust in Asse/ov/Subs
←
(SFS)
Option 1
Option 2
Prev GAAP (AS) CAL
Deemed cost for Ind As
→
Fair valve on Date of Transition
→ Deemed cost for Ind As
Inf
6
⑥ Business Combinations (AS (AS 14,  , AS AS 21) 21)
①No actrospective accounting
of Past Businels
Combination
Ind As 103
Apply Burn Comb retrospectively Bal
from a particular date
↓
All acquisitions after the selected date
need to be restated retrospectively.
eg: DOT 01-04-26
Before 01.04.21 (No Ina As)
Selected
Date
01.04.21
After 01.04.21 (follow Ind As
retrospectively)
Note:
① whether or Not Past Bush Comb are restated, one Imp Ady needs to be done
Subsumed (included) in goodwill, And as per Ind As such
If any intangible was
intangible can be recognised separately.
In that care
remove such intangible from glw & record it separately.
Also Glew Amortization staps (Only tested for Impairment annually)
Eg. As per As GON 700
Cinauding
mineral Sic
As
per Ind As mineral rigut is a
le 'worry 300
engur Intangible
sep. intang. Asset
As per Iul AS
Geu
Mineral rigut - 300
=
400 (700-300)
RTP' May 23 (Querg of 0.8)
Subsidiary
as per
 If parent has not consolidated with Subsidiary (because either it was NOT
per Prev GAAP or CFS was not required
in Prev GAAP)
But is requied to consolidale as per Ind As, then
In this case, Subs would prepare its SFS
al Der
per Ind AS
for the purpose
of CFS & consolidation with parent.
Also since we are consolidating, we will compute crew
4 Subs INA as per Ind AS
V
PC (coill be value of Inust in Subs in Parent's SFS) XX
(illus 5, Q.10)
Geo/GB1
Inuct in Jv (treatment in (FS)
OFU
ASJV-
Prop Consolidation
$=(A527)$
Ind AS JA
(Ind Asıll)
ぐ
 
Prop consolidation
Equity method. (CFS)
Imist in JV XX
Assets of  as per prop consolidat
(+) Glew in Ju Cif any)
(liab of Ju as per
per prop consolidation
Valve of Invst in JV XX
* Mandatoy Exceptious
Non-controlling Interest
J
No retrospective
application of
Past Buen Comb
Min Int (NCE) cannot be
restated
cannot be -ve
CAS- Minonty Interest)
Cind As NCE cau be -ve) ve
If Burn Comb retrospectively applied
from a particular date
NCI of those acquisitions will also
be restated.
Indas
FV = PV of FCF @ EIR
Measurement of FA I FL
↓
If EIR can be computed
retrospectively
الا
Apply Ind As 109
retrospectively
If FIR cannot be computed
retrospectively
Fy on Date of Transition
Deemed Fv for FA IFL
③ Grout loans cet Below Mkt Int Phate
CAS only loan (Face valve) FL-100L
FV (PV Of FCF @EIR) - FOL
Ind AS 1001
DGG
→
301
За
eg.
Ceg
Prospective Accounting
Record loan (FL) as
per prev GAAP CA
AS-100m 100L (FC)
laay
Ind As lean 100 (FL)
Restrospective Application
Apply Ind As retrospectively
& Bifurcate the FL  DGG
ル
(Note: To follow retrospective appliccern
we will Need Elf on the date of
loan taken)
If Not available they cannot choose
this option
"Prov for Doubtful Debt
Prov for warranty)
 Estimales (Pro
4
Apply Prospective
Prev GAAP CA
Ind AS CA
Retrospectively apply
Ind AS
only if
you have evidence on dade
of estimates
الا
DO NOT consider future fack & circumstances
that arised post the date of estimates.
eg: DOT 0104.26
Est created on 01-04-13
As per Ind As only use
evidence as on 01.04.13
Solve Eg (Py 22.6)
AS (EQ)
Ind AS $(F)$ →
LOR
-
1cr
?
Ier
on 01.04.x5
Ind AS fatore Alc'ing (Prog)
Step CF
ar
0
Ier
in flow
1-4
$4^{m}_{ur}$ $VdS_{cr}$ out flow
Step F of FL (FIR missing)
Assume ler
Step EIR (interpolation)
Compute this
5.74%
Co- will choose option
option of Prosp. Accounting
(as per of 20x2 not available) so
cewe cannot bifurcate into FL & DGG.
Step 4 LAT
asper As it was shown in eq.
Day J-E
01-04-25
Equity
Icr
TO FL
Icr
Hal
per Ind As
Ques 2: Same ces above eg:
Illus 15 (LOR) Date of Trasition
01.04. 3
Ind AS
01.04. 1
6% Deb (CFF)
Step
CF
Ur
 
Jut
Prine
0
FL
1-4
4th
FL
Coption
Holder)
Savinge in
Jut
Equity
$301(in~Hoo)$
$1.8e~p-a(outflow-(oupon)$
$30L+10\%=33~L$ (Prine out $\hat{A}_{ou}$)
prem.
Step Fair value of FL (PVOf FCF @EIR)
$F8L\times AF$ of 44η @10%
(+) 33L  DF of 4tu yr @10%
$=28,14,600$
Step Diff Btw FV & T.P (Eq. Comp)
$=18\$400$
Step FIR: 10%
Step LAT (FL)
ur
Opn
31-3-×2
31.3.x3
2814600
29 16060
Jut@10%
281460
291606
Repay
(180000)
(180000)
८५
2916060
3027666
FL on 01.04.x3
 on 01.04.13 185400
Dale of Transition $(1\cdot4\times3)$
As per Ind AS $FL=302766$
$\overline{Tq}=185400$
As per As (od valve)
Icht calculation
301 + 31x2
:
Face
Valve
$=31,50,000$
14
Premium accrued But not paid.
01.04.1 to 01.04.×3
JE
FL (Old) Ale Dr 3150000
RE ACC
Da
63066
TO FL
3027666
TO Eq
185400
If in exam J-E not asked,
then present this in statement
form
SenⅡⅢ (Draft)   
Illus 16 (LDR)
Give 1-2 Line Reasone for
each
Adj (Refer Q.8)
Transition Date Bls of Hitd as at 01/04/ 1
Illus 17 (LDR)
Copy from quel only.
Give 1-2 Line expl" for each Adj
Transition Date (opening) Bls of Shaurya Itd
As at 01/04/18
Illus 22 CLDR)
Imust in JY (Auer on Date of Transition)
Assels in  (as per prep. consolidation) 1935
( )  in JV (CON)
Jul
Liab in  
Inrst in Jy (asper Ind As)
Calculation of Glw relating to JV in CFS
$(1200+405+280+50)$
119
$\frac{(110)}{1944}$
$(75+35)$
Total GHW  Net Assels Belonging to
Total Net Assels only take those Asset  liab where
$7(1200+405+280+50-75-35)$
$507\times\frac{1825}{23137}$
=
119 approx.
$4(22,288+1507+6350+1818+104-8455-475)$
Prepare BIs on Date of Frousition (Refer 8.8)
Jy was
imvolved.
Illus 23 (LDR)
i) Bal of Eq & other Eq (as per Ind As)
(Fin crores)
Total Equity
182-03
iⅱ) Rew Btw total Equity
as
per
Der As & Ind As
As per As
ESC
80
Pse
25
(+1 Rer  Surp
95
Total Eq as per AS
200
Adjustments of Ind AS
PCC (FL as per Ind As)
(25)
5-5
0-18
0.75
To tal Eq as per Ind As
182.03
Ques 4- Refer Q-B
Ques  (IDR)
F-E explain
 
Theory heler OB
AS
Ind AS
Impart
Iscue
PPE ALC De
3,00,000
To Revalvation Serplus (OE)
3,00,000
Issue2
Issue
FL (loan taken) 20000
TO RE (OE)
20000
Issue
Provision (Div Payable) 30000
TO RE
Issue (5) No entry
Issue  RE (QE) 25000
TO DIL
30,000
25000
Ques 8 (IDR)
i) Verted Shares (80,000 shares →
↓
Velted Before Date of Transition
G-D. 01 04  , Vesty date 31/3/x2)
In Ind As 101, there is an option available to use Prev GAAP valve as the
valve of vested shares in Ind As
But since no accounting is done in Prev CAAP (ie.As), therefore it is an
error as per Ind AS8  hence no
apply prev CrAAP valve as Ind As valve,
exemption will be available to
01/04/42
(Date of
Trausition)
1x2 - (As per Ind AS 101)   (het. Farminge)
TO SBP Reserve
(80000 chors x 720 x lur)
16,00,000
16,00,000
ii) Inverted shares
For 40000 shares to be vested on 31/03/25, G-D. 01/   
Co. has not accounted for this. This is an error & accounting
will be retrospectively from Date of Transition
here.
Date of travition 01.04.x2
EBE RE
TO SBI Reserve
2,00,000
2,00,000
$(40000\times20\times\frac{1}{4})$
$(x2-x3)$ 313.x3 $(Py)$ EBE
200000
d00000
TO SBP Reseme
$(\frac{4000\times20\times}{2})$
$-200000)$
(x3-x4) 31.3.x4 ( ) EBE
TO SBP Reseme
31.3x5 Not asked
200000
d00000
