↓
↓
1. Scope
2- Complete set of
3. General
IND AS 1 Presentation of F.S.
↓
4. Rectification/
FS
Features of
waiver of
Fin. Stat
Breached   
4
4
i) Bls iⅱ) PIL  ) SOCE
iv) Cash) Notes viⅱ) Comparatives. wii) Opn
flow
+
Current
Asset
↓
Bls of
Current
Breach
Py.
द
Non-C-A
Liaby
2
of Long
Term loan
NCL
* 2. Complete set of FS
Bis
CJ.
31.3.x2
↓
P-y.
Opn BIS
3/3/×1
1.4.X10
0
FIFQ
PIL
WAM
FIFO
WAM
WAM
3
③ SOCE (Stat of changes in Eq)
4
Notes to Alc's
Cash flow
⑥ Comparatives for I year
@pn Bls on Day of Py. Prepared only when:
Change in Acc Policy Retrospective
[Ind As 8  Detailed
Discussion
(eg: FIFO weighted Aug)
New method.
②Error Rectity 
Retrospective
③ Classification
Retrospective.
Error
$\int eg\cdot Ifem$
Non-Current Cincorrect classification)
Current
* Correut Asset
4 Conditions
(Any 1)
$[RM+FG+Inv_{Sdlo}+D/g]\rightarrow1Sm$
① Expected to be realised in Normal Op. cycle (OR)
② Expected to be realised within 12 mouths from the
and of Reporting period. $(g$ 01.07.x2
01.07.12 loan given
for 16 months CA
OR
01/07/ 2
 
16m
arend
$91\cdot3\cdot\times3$
7m
31.10-X3
 Held for Trading [eg: Inventory, Derivative financial Asset]
eg Cash Bal
Bauk Bal
OR
 If it is cash or cash equivalent (As per Ind As 7)
Cash flow
stat
Except if it is restricted from being used for
atleast 12m from the end of Rep. period.
Savings Alc
F-D
less thom
3m
more than
3m
لا
CCEX
$CCE\times$
eg FD 6m
Current
Asset
↓
eg: Vijay Kalya Savings Ale
Seize (freeze)
348.
NCA
Eg. (CL Def) Due
→
Eg
(loan taken)
१
AK
(Liab)
CL
(Due)
NCLX
loan given (Assel)
Chetan
4
Expectation receive
Payment is due within 11m from the end of $R_{ep}$ period.
Ak expects that he will repay atter Qurs.
Eg: CL Depa (4th point)
loan taken
payment after  
لا
$CA\times$
$NCA<(Exped^{\circ})$
Ak
Manav
Due coithin 11m from the end of Rep. period.
Alk has an
unconditional Right To defer the payment for at least
2yeay.
Ak loan liab
Defer option AK X
4
X
CL
NCL.
U
CL (4m Detn)
* Breach of Long team loan
01-04- 2
500 crores
Chor Bank
Ak Cloan taken)
109rs.
Condition : 15/03/x3 Promoter's Couth soocr.
$\odot lo4\cdot\times2\rightarrow loan\rightarrow NCL$
$31\cdot12\cdot XL\rightarrow loau\rightarrow NCL$
If he fails, then loan becomes repayable on demand.
$14\cdot03\cdot\times3\rightarrow loau\rightarrow NCL$
CASE A: On 15/03/x3 promoter's Defaul Ited
$3|o3|\times3\rightarrow locon\rightarrow conrent\cdot$
→
Promoter's Defaulted
CASEB: On 15/03/x3
on 16/031x3
→
Grace Period
2yrs from the end of Rep. period.
31/3/83 loan→
NCL.
Casec: On 15/03/x3
→
Promoter's Defaulted
on 16/03/x3
→ Grace Period -
6m from the end of Rep. period.
(less than 12m from the end of
Rep. period).
$3|3|\times3\rightarrow loauu\rightarrow C\cdot L$
Case D: On 15/03/x3 Promoter's Defaulted.
treat it like more than 12m
But on
16/03/x3-
Grace Peried exact 12m from the end of Rep. period.
$31|3|\times3\rightarrow loan\rightarrow NCL$
311373
12m
31131x4
H
alalxy
Case E: Before Default ie. on
08/03/x3 Extend the compliance
31/3/x3 loan
4
Imp
FRwith AK
exclusive
→ will retain ik
Original classification
ie (NCL)
Breach of long Team loan
After Breach
G-Pless
than
12 m
C.L.
GP
exact 12m
or
more than
12m
ل
NCL
date by 6 mouths 15-03 x3
15-09-x3
Before Breach
Compliance Dat
extended (3m/6m/
Ci-e.Nodefault 9m/12m
on yr end) 24m)
NCL (It retains
its
original
classification)
