CHAPTER 14
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD
101: FIRST-TIME ADOPTION
OF IND AS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
Understand the objective for issuing this standard
Appreciate the applicability and non-applicability of this standard
Define the relevant terms like ‘First Ind AS Financial Statements', 'First
-time adopter', 'Opening Ind AS Balance sheet', 'Date of Transition to
Ind AS', 'First Ind AS reporting period',  Deemed cost' and  Previous
GAAP'
Apply the recognition and measurement principles in the preparation of
opening Ind AS Balance Sheets
Evaluate the mandatory exceptions in which Ind AS prohibits
retrospective application of Ind AS
Examine when Ind AS 101 grants voluntary exemptions from some
specific requirements of other Ind AS
Know the carve outs in Ind AS 101 from IFRS 1
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.2
FINANCIAL REPORTING
CHAPTER OVERVIEW ☐
Ind AS 101
Objective and Scope
Definitions
Recognition and
Measurement
Presentation and
Disclosure
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Opening Ind
Balance Sheet
Accounting policies
AS
Exceptions to the
 retrospective
application of other Ind
AS
Exemptions from other
Ind AS
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.3
1.
INTRODUCTION
Ind AS 101 prescribes the accounting principles for first time adoption of Ind AS. It lays down
various 'transition' requirements when a company adopts Ind AS for the first time, i.e., a move
from Accounting Standards (Indian GAAP) to Ind AS.
Conceptually, the accounting under Ind AS should be applied retrospectively at the time of
transition to Ind AS. However, Ind AS 101 grants limited exemptions from these requirements
in specified areas where the cost of complying with them would be likely to exceed the benefits
to users of financial statements. Ind AS 101 also prohibits retrospective application of Ind AS in
some areas (called exceptions), particularly where retrospective application would require
judgments by management about past conditions after the outcome of a particular transaction is
already known.
Ind AS 101 also prescribes presentation and disclosure requirements to explain the transition to
the users of financial statements including explaining how the transition from Indian GAAP to
Ind AS affected the company's financial position, financial performance and cash flows.
Ind AS 101 does not provide any exemption from the disclosure requirements in other Ind AS.
2. OBJECTIVE
The objective of this Ind AS is to ensure that an entity's first Ind-AS financial statements, and its
interim financial reports for part of the period covered by those financial statements, contain
high quality information that:
•
•
•
is transparent for users and comparable;
provides a suitable starting point; and
at a cost that does not exceed the benefits.
1.
3.
DEFINITIONS
First Ind AS Financial Statements
•
The first annual financial statements in which an entity adopts Ind AS, by an
explicit and unreserved statement of compliance with Ind AS.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
14.4
FINANCIAL REPORTING
• This means compliance with ALL Ind-AS, partial compliance is not enough to make
entity Ind AS compliant.
First-time adopter
An entity that presents its first Ind AS financial statements, that entity is known as first
time adopter
Opening Ind AS Balance sheet
3.
An entity's balance sheet at the date of transition to Ind AS
4.
Date of Transition to Ind AS
The beginning of the earliest period for which an entity presents full comparative
information under Ind ASs in first Ind AS Financial statements.
Illustration 1
X Ltd. is required to adopt Ind AS from April 1, 20X1, with comparatives for one year, i.e.,
for 20X0-20X1.
What will be its date of transition?
Solution
The date of transition for X Ltd. will be April 1, 20X0 being the beginning of the earliest
comparative period presented. To explain it further, X Ltd. is required to adopt an Ind AS
from April 1, 20X1 (i.e. year 20X1-20X2), and it will give comparatives as per Ind AS for
20X0-20X1. Accordingly, the beginning of the comparative period will be April 1, 20X0
which will be considered as date of transition.
*****
5.
First Ind AS reporting period
• The latest reporting period covered by an entity's first Ind AS financial statements
Example 1
XYZ Ltd. is a BSE listed company having net worth of 100 cr. XYZ Ltd. has to
prepare financial statements as per Ind AS from 1st April 20X1.
The first Ind AS Financial Statements would be for period ending as on 31.3.20X2
First-time adopter - "XYZ Ltd" with effect from 1.4.20X1
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
Opening Ind AS Balance sheet – 1.4.20X0
Date of Transition to Ind AS – 1.4.20X0
First Ind AS reporting period 1.4.20X1 to 31.3.20X2
14.5
The financial statements for the period 1.4.20X0 to 31.3.20X1 shall be the
comparative period for the first Ind AS reporting period.
Deemed cost
An amount used as a surrogate for cost or depreciated cost at a given date. Subsequent
depreciation or amortisation assumes that the entity had initially recognised the asset or
liability at the given date and that its cost was equal to the deemed cost. This definition
will be used in measurement, at the date of transition to Ind AS, of
(i)
investments in subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates
7.
(ii)
(iii)
property, plant and equipment, an investment property, an intangible asset or a
right-of-use asset
assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination when the
exemption under Ind AS 101 is availed.
Previous GAAP
The basis of accounting that a first-time adopter used for its statutory reporting
requirements in India immediately before adopting Ind AS. For instance, companies
required to prepare their financial statements in accordance with Section 133 of the
Companies Act, 2013, shall consider those financial statements as previous GAAP
financial statements. Those previous GAAP financial statements were prepared as per
the Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2006 and hence such accounting
standards are the "Previous GAAP" for those companies in India.
Illustration 2
Company B is a foreign subsidiary of Company A and has adopted IFRS as issued by
IASB as its primary GAAP for its local financial reporting purposes. Company B prepares
its financial statements as per Accounting Standards specified under Section 133 of the
Companies Act, 2013 read with Rule 7 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 for the
purpose of consolidation with Company A.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.6
FINANCIAL REPORTING
On transition of Company A to Ind-AS, what would be the previous GAAP of the foreign
subsidiary Company B for its financial statements prepared for consolidation with
Company A?
Solution
Ind AS 101 defines previous GAAP as the basis of accounting that a first-time adopter
used for its statutory reporting requirements in India (emphasis added) immediately
before adopting Ind AS. For instance, companies preparing their financial statements in
accordance with the Accounting Standards specified under Section 133 of the Companies
Act, 2013 read with Rule 7 of the Companies (Accounts) Rules, 2014 shall consider those
financial statements as previous GAAP financial statements.
Accordingly, the previous GAAP of the foreign subsidiary for the purpose of consolidation
under Ind AS with the parent company would be accounting standards specified under
Section 133 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Rule 7 of the Companies (Accounts)
Rules, 2014 and not the IFRS as issued by the IASB since the first time adoption has to
be considered in the context of India only.
*****
4. SCOPE
Ind AS 101 applies to:
•
First Ind AS financial statements
•
•
Each interim financial report for part of the period covered by its first Ind AS financial
statements. For example, if the period covered by the first Ind AS financial statements is
year ended 31 March 20X2 and the company prepares quarterly financial results (i.e.
interim financial report) for each quarter of that year, Ind AS 101 shall be applied in
preparation of those financial results.
However, it does not apply to:
Changes in accounting policies made by an entity that already applied Ind AS.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.7
Illustration 3
E Ltd. is required to first time adopt Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) from 1 April 20X1.
The management of E Ltd. has prepared its financial statements in accordance with Ind AS and
an explicit and unreserved statement of compliance with Ind AS has been given by the
management. However, there is a disagreement on application of one Ind AS between the
management and the auditor.
Can such financial statements of E Ltd. be treated as first Ind AS financial statements?
Solution
Ind AS 101 defines first Ind AS financial statements as "The first annual financial statements in
which an entity adopts Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS), by an explicit and unreserved
statement of compliance with Ind AS." In accordance with the above definition, if an explicit and
unreserved statement of compliance with Ind AS has been given in the financial statements,
even if the auditor's report contains a qualification because of disagreement on application of
Indian Accounting Standard(s), it would be considered that E Ltd. has done the first time
adoption of Ind AS. In such a case, exemptions given under Ind AS 101 cannot be availed
again. If, however, the unreserved statement of compliance with Ind AS is not given in the
financial statements, such financial statements would not be considered to be first Ind AS
financial statements.
*****
5. RECOGNITION AND MEASUREMENT
5.1 Opening Ind AS Balance Sheet
An entity shall prepare and present an opening Ind AS balance sheet at the date of transition to
Ind AS. This is the starting point for its accounting in accordance with Ind AS.
5.2 Accounting policies
Entity uses the same accounting policies in its opening Ind AS Balance Sheet and through all
periods presented in its first Ind AS financial statements. Those accounting policies shall
comply with each Ind AS effective at the end of its first Ind AS reporting period, subject to:
• Mandatory exceptions and
•
Optional exemptions
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.8
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Example 2: Consistent application of latest version of Ind AS
The end of entity A's first Ind AS reporting period is 31 March 20X2. Entity A decides to present
comparative information in those financial statements for one year only. Therefore, its date of
transition to Ind AS is the beginning of business on 1 April 20X0 (or, equivalently, close of
business on 31 March 20X0).
Entity A presented financial statements in accordance with its previous GAAP annually to
31 March each year up to, and including, 31 March 20X1.
Application of requirements:
Entity A is required to apply the Ind AS effective for periods ending on 31 March 20X2 in:
a) preparing and presenting its opening Ind AS balance sheet at 1 April 20X0; and
b) preparing and presenting its balance sheet for 31 March 20X2 (including comparative
amounts for the year ended 31 March 20X1), statement of profit and loss, statement of
changes in equity and statement of cash flows for the year to 31 March 20X2 (including
comparative amounts for the year ended 31 March 20X1) and disclosures (including
comparative information for the year ended 31 March 20X1).
If a new Ind AS is not yet mandatory but permits early application, entity A is permitted, but not
required, to apply that Ind AS in its first Ind AS financial statements.
The general principle of Ind AS 101
It may be noted that the way Ind AS 101 is structured, it first lays down the general principle that
all Ind AS, as effective for the first Ind AS reporting period, should be applied retrospectively i.e.
at the starting point, which is the opening Ind AS balance sheet, should carry the balances as if
Ind AS has always been applied by the company in the past.
Once the general principle has been specified, Ind AS 101 then talks about certain (a)
exemptions and (b) exceptions, the former being voluntary and the latter being mandatory, as
mentioned above.
So lets talk of the general principle first - an entity shall, in its opening Ind AS Balance sheet:
•
•
Recognise all assets and liabilities whose recognition is required by Ind AS. For example,
recognition of derivative assets and liabilities for which a different guidance was followed
under Indian GAAP or intangible assets arising in a business combination, which were not
carried in the books of the acquiree entity under Indian GAAP;
Not recognise items as assets or liabilities if Ind AS do not permit such recognition. For
example, Ind AS 115, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, has different thresholds for
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.9
•
•
revenue recognition as compared to AS 9 under Indian GAAP and hence an item that is
recognized as a trade receivable in Indian GAAP, may not be so recognized under Ind AS;
Reclassify items that it recognised in accordance with previous GAAP as one type of
asset, liability or component of equity, but are a different type of asset, liability or
component of equity in accordance with Ind AS. For example, Ind AS requires
classification of assets given on operating lease as investment property whereas the
same are presented as property, plant and equipment under Indian GAAP; and
Apply Ind AS in measuring all recognised assets and liabilities. For example, Ind AS has
well-defined measurement principles for financial assets and liabilities, like certain
investments are measured at fair value under Ind AS, whereas the same are measured at
lower of cost and fair value under Indian GAAP.
6.
EXCEPTIONS/ EXEMPTIONS
There are two categories of provisions in Ind AS 101 under which the general principle
mentioned above is applied in a modified manner:
1.
Mandatory exceptions to the retrospective application of other Ind AS
2.
Optional exemptions from retrospective application of other Ind AS
6.1 Mandatory exceptions to the retrospective application of other
Ind AS
1.
Estimates
An entity's estimates in accordance with Ind AS at the date of transition to Ind AS shall be
consistent with estimates made for the same date in accordance with previous GAAP
(after adjustments to reflect any difference in accounting policies), unless there is
objective evidence that those estimates were in error.
Step 1 Estimates required by previous GAAP? If yes, then go to Step 2 otherwise Step 3.
Step 2 Evidence of Error? If yes then go to Step 3 otherwise Step 4.
Step 3 Make estimate reflecting condition at relevant date i.e. the date to which the
estimate relates.
Step 4 Consistent with Ind AS? If yes then go to step 5 otherwise Step 6
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
14.10
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Step 5 Use previous estimates
Step 6 Use previous estimates and adjust to reflect Ind AS.
Yes
Estimates required by
previous GAAP
No
Yes
Make
estimate
Evidence of
Error
reflecting condition
at relevant date
No
Yes
Consistent
with Ind AS
Use
estimates
previous
No
Use previous estimates and
adjust to reflect Ind AS
Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities
A first-time adopter shall apply the derecognition requirements in Ind AS 109
prospectively for transactions occurring on or after the date of transition to Ind AS.
Example 3
If a first time adopter derecognised non-derivative financial assets or non-derivative
financial liabilities in accordance with its previous GAAP as a result of a transaction that
occurred before the date of transition to Ind AS, it shall not recognise those assets and
liabilities in accordance with Ind AS (unless they qualify for recognition as a result of a
later transaction or event). A practical example of such financial assets could be
securitization of a loan portfolio by a NBFC to a Trust before the date of transition
resulting in derecognition of the same from books under Indian GAAP, whereas under Ind
AS, the derecognition criteria may not have been met.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
3.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.11
An entity may apply the derecognition requirements in Ind AS 109 retrospectively from a
date of the entity's choosing, provided that the information needed to apply Ind AS 109 to
financial assets and financial liabilities derecognised as a result of past transactions was
obtained at the time of initially accounting for those transactions.
Hedge accounting
At the date of transition to Ind AS an entity shall:
(a)
measure all derivatives at fair value; and
(b)
eliminate all deferred losses and gains arising on derivatives that were reported in
accordance with previous GAAP as if they were assets or liabilities.
An entity shall not reflect in its opening Ind AS Balance Sheet a hedging relationship of a
type that does not qualify for hedge accounting in accordance with Ind AS 109 (for
example, many hedging relationships where the hedging instrument is a stand-alone
written option or a net written option; or where the hedged item is a net position in a cash
flow hedge for another risk than foreign currency risk). In other words, if the hedge
relationship:
(A)
is of a type that qualifies for hedge accounting (i.e. hedge relationship consists of
eligible hedging instruments and eligible hedged items as per Ind AS 109), and
(B)
is designated under Indian GAAP
then:
(1)
(2)
the hedge relationship is required to be reflected in the opening Ind AS Balance
Sheet, irrespective of whether other conditions for applying hedge accounting (i.e.
documentation and effectiveness) are met; and
if those conditions are not met, requirements of Ind AS 109 with respect to
discontinuance of hedge accounting are applied subsequently.
As a corollary to this principle, if either of (A) or (B) above are not met, barring a specific
exception (dealt with in subsequent paragraph), the hedge relationship is required to be
removed from the opening Ind AS Balance Sheet.
If an entity designated a net position as a hedged item in accordance with previous
GAAP, which is not a qualifying hedged item otherwise under Ind AS 109, it may
designate as a hedged item in accordance with Ind AS an individual item within that net
position, or a net position if that meets the requirements in Ind AS 109, provided that it
does so no later than the date of transition to Ind AS.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.12
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
Hedge accounting is followed only from the date the qualifying criteria are met,
irrespective of the conditions stated at (A) and (B) above. Transactions entered into
before the date of transition to Ind AS shall not be retrospectively designated as hedges.
Non-controlling interests
A first-time adopter shall apply the following requirements of Ind AS 110 prospectively
from the date of transition to Ind AS:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Total comprehensive income is attributed to the owners of the parent and to the
non-controlling interests even if this results in the non-controlling interests having a
deficit balance;
Accounting for changes in the parent's ownership interest in a subsidiary that do
not result in a loss of control; and
Accounting for a loss of control over a subsidiary, and the related requirements of
Ind AS 105, Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued operations i.e.
classification of all the assets and liabilities of that subsidiary as held for sale.
However, if a first-time adopter elects to apply Ind AS 103 retrospectively to past
business combinations, it shall also apply Ind AS 110 from that date.
Illustration 4
Ind AS requires allocation of losses to the non-controlling interest, which may ultimately
lead to a debit balance in non-controlling interests, even if there is no contract with the
non-controlling interest holders to contribute assets to the Company to fund the losses.
Whether this adjustment is required or permitted to be made retrospectively?
Solution
In case an entity elects not to restate past business combinations, Ind AS 101 requires
the measurement of non-controlling interests (NCI) to follow from the measurement of
other assets and liabilities on transition to Ind AS. However, Ind AS 101 contains a
mandatory exception that prohibits retrospective allocation of accumulated profits
between the owners of the parent and the NCI. In case an entity elects not to restate
past business combinations, the previous GAAP carrying value of NCI is not changed
other than for adjustments made (remeasurement of the assets and liabilities subsequent
to the business combination) as part of the transition to Ind AS. As such, the carrying
value of NCI in the opening Ind AS balance sheet cannot have a deficit balance on
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.13
account of recognition of the losses attributable to the non-controlling interest, which was
not recognised under the previous GAAP as part of NCI in the absence of contract to
contribute assets to fund such a deficit.
However, the NCI could have a deficit balance due to remeasurement of the assets and
liabilities subsequent to the business combination as part of the transition to Ind AS.
In case an entity restates past business combination, Ind AS 101 requires that the
balance in NCI as at the date of transition shall be determined retrospectively in
accordance with Ind AS, taking into account the impact of other elections made as part of
the adoption of Ind AS.
As such, the NCI could have a deficit balance on account of losses attributable to the
NCI, even if there is no obligation on the holders of NCI to contribute assets to fund such
a deficit.
*****
5.
Classification and measurement of financial instruments
Ind AS 109 contains principles for classification of a financial asset as at (a) amortised
cost or (b) fair value through other comprehensive income or (c) fair value through profit
or loss. Such classification depends on assessment of features of the financial asset on
the date of its initial recognition.
Ind AS 101 provides an exception to this general principle by requiring that such
assessment should be done on the date of transition to Ind AS.
Ind AS 101 further provides that if it is impracticable to assess the below mentioned
features of a financial asset as at the date of transition to Ind AS, the "contractual cash
flow characteristics test" shall be done without taking into account those features:
Modified time value of money element
Significance of the fair value of a prepayment feature
An entity shall disclose the carrying amount of such financial assets until those financial
assets are derecognized.
Ind AS 109 requires the measurement of amortised cost of a financial asset or a financial
liability using effective interest method. As an exception to this general measurement
principle, Ind AS 101 provides that if it is impracticable (as defined in Ind AS 8) for an
entity to apply retrospectively the effective interest method in Ind AS 109, the fair value of
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.
7.
8.
14.14
FINANCIAL REPORTING
the financial asset or the financial liability at the date of transition to Ind AS shall be the
new gross carrying amount of that financial asset or the new amortised cost of that
financial liability at the date of transition to Ind AS.
Impairment of financial assets
An entity shall apply the impairment requirements of Ind AS 109 retrospectively subject to
the below:
At the date of transition to Ind AS, an entity shall use reasonable and supportable
information that is available without undue cost or effort to determine the credit risk
at the date that financial instruments were initially recognised.
An entity is not required to undertake an exhaustive search for information when
determining, at the date of transition to Ind AS, whether there have been
significant increases in credit risk since initial recognition.
If, at the date of transition to Ind ASs, determining whether there has been a
significant increase in credit risk since the initial recognition of a financial
instrument would require undue cost or effort, an entity shall recognise a loss
allowance at an amount equal to lifetime expected credit losses at each reporting
date until that financial instrument is derecognised, unless that financial instrument
is low credit risk at a reporting date.
Embedded derivatives
A first-time adopter shall assess whether an embedded derivative is required to be
separated from the host contract and accounted for as a derivative on the basis of the
conditions that existed at the later of (a) the date it first became a party to the contract
and (b) the date a reassessment is required by Ind AS 109 i.e. when there is a change in
the terms of the contract that significantly modifies the cash flows that otherwise would be
required under the contract.
Government loans
A first-time adopter shall classify all government loans received as a financial liability or
an equity instrument in accordance with Ind AS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation.
A first-time adopter shall apply the requirements in Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments,
and Ind AS 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government
Assistance, prospectively to government loans existing at the date of transition to Ind AS
and shall not recognise the corresponding benefit of the government loan at a below-
market rate of interest as a government grant.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.15
Calculations have been done on full scale calculator. However, in case calculations are done
taking EIR as exact 5.74%, then there will be difference of a few due to rounding off.
An entity may apply the requirements in Ind AS 109 and Ind AS 20 retrospectively to any
government loan originated before the date of transition to Ind AS, provided that the
information needed to do so had been obtained at the time of initially accounting for that
loan.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.16
FINANCIAL REPORTING
6.2 Optional exemptions from retrospective application of other Ind AS
1.
Business combination
Ind AS 103 need not be applied to business combinations before date of transition. But,
if one business combination is restated to comply with Ind AS 103, all subsequent
business combinations are restated.
When the exemption is used:
There won't be any change in classification from previous GAAP.
For example, if the "pooling of interests" method is applied as per AS 14, the
balances of assets and liabilities arising therefrom shall be carried forward.
Another example is regarding the identification of the acquirer - irrespective of the
fact that a business combination could have been a reverse acquisition as per Ind
AS 103, the accounting adopted in previous GAAP shall be continued.
*
Recognition exemptions:
The table below summarises the provisions of paragraph C4(b) and (c) of Ind AS 101:
* Unless a financial asset or financial liability was derecognised in previous GAAP
(refer mandatory exception below)
** Including any resulting changes to deferred tax and non-controlling interests
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
Measurement exemptions:
Ο
Ο
Ο
14.17
If an asset acquired or liability assumed was not recognized in
previous GAAP but would have been recognised in Ind AS, it shall
not have a deemed cost of zero and shall be measured at the amount
at which Ind AS would require it to be measured. The resulting
change is recognised in retained earnings.
If an asset acquired or liability assumed was recognized in previous
GAAP but Ind AS would require its subsequent measurement at other
than original cost (for example, investments in certain equity
instruments as per Ind AS 109), it shall be measured at such basis
and not its original cost. The resulting change is recognised in
retained earnings. Refer Example 5 below.
In all other cases, no measurement adjustment shall be made to the
carrying amounts of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Therefore, it should be evident that the balance of goodwill or capital
reserve as per previous GAAP is not adjusted for any reason other
than:
Recognition of an intangible asset that was earlier subsumed in
goodwill or capital reserve but Ind AS requires it to be
recognised separately; or
Vice versa, an asset that was recognised as an intangible asset
under previous GAAP but is not permitted to be recognised as
an asset under Ind AS.
Regardless of whether there is any indication that the goodwill may be impaired,
the goodwill has to be tested for impairment at the date of transition to Ind AS and
any resulting impairment loss is to be recognised in retained earnings (or, if so
required by Ind AS 36, in revaluation surplus). The impairment test is based on
conditions at the date of transition to Ind AS.
Example 5
If the acquirer had not, in accordance with its previous GAAP, capitalised leases
acquired in a past business combination in which acquiree was a lessee, it shall
capitalise those leases in its consolidated financial statements, as Ind AS 116,
would require the acquiree to do in its Ind AS Balance Sheet.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.18
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Similarly, if the acquirer had not, in accordance with its previous GAAP, recognised a
contingent liability that still exists at the date of transition to Ind AS, the acquirer shall
recognise that contingent liability at that date unless Ind AS 37 would prohibit its
recognition in the financial statements of the acquiree.
As discussed in the chapter on consolidation, Ind AS 110 requires an entity to be
consolidated based on assessment of "control". This assessment may sometimes result
in consolidation of entities which were not consolidated in the previous GAAP financial
statements.
Let's understand the implications of this in the context of first Ind AS financial statements
through an illustration.
Illustration 5
A Ltd. had made certain investments in B Ltd.'s convertible debt instruments. The
conversion rights are substantive rights and would provide A Ltd. with control over B Ltd.
A Ltd. has evaluated that B Ltd. would be treated as its subsidiary under Ind AS and,
hence, would require consolidation in its Ind AS consolidated financial statements. B Ltd.
was not considered as a subsidiary, associate or a joint venture under previous GAAP.
How should B Ltd. be consolidated on transition to Ind AS assuming that A Ltd. has opted
to avail the exemption from retrospective restatement of past business combinations?
Solution
Ind AS 101 prescribes an optional exemption from retrospective restatement in relation to
past business combinations. Ind AS 101 prescribes that when the past business
combinations are not restated and a parent entity had not consolidated an entity as a
subsidiary in accordance with its previous GAAP (either because it was not regarded as a
subsidiary or no consolidated financial statements were required under previous GAAP),
then the subsidiary's assets and liabilities would be included in the parent's opening
consolidated financial statements at such values as would appear in the subsidiary's
separate financial statements if the subsidiary were to adopt the Ind AS as at the parent's
date of transition. For this purpose, the subsidiary's separate financial statements would
be prepared as if it was a first-time adopter of Ind AS i.e. after applying the relevant first-
time adoption mandatory exceptions and voluntary exemptions. In other words, the
parent will adjust the carrying amount of the subsidiary's assets and liabilities to the
amounts that Ind AS would require in the subsidiary's balance sheet.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.19
The deemed cost of goodwill equals the difference at the date of transition between:
(a)
the parent's interest in those adjusted carrying amounts; and
(b)
the cost in the parent's separate financial statements of its investment in the
subsidiary.
The measurement of non-controlling interest and deferred tax follows from the
measurement of other assets and liabilities.
It may be noted here that the above exemption is available only under those
circumstances where the parent, in accordance with the previous GAAP, has not
presented consolidated financial statements for the previous year; or where the
consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with the previous GAAP
but the entity was not treated as a subsidiary, associate or joint venture under the
previous GAAP.
*****
Illustration 6
A Ltd. has a subsidiary B Ltd. On first time adoption of Ind AS by B Ltd., it availed the
optional exemption of not restating its past business combinations. However, A Ltd. in its
consolidated financial statements has decided to restate all its past business
combinations.
Whether the amounts recorded by subsidiary need to be adjusted while preparing the
consolidated financial statements of A Ltd. considering that A Ltd. does not avail the
business combination exemption? Will the answer be different if A Ltd. adopts Ind AS
after B Ltd?
Solution
As per Ind AS 101: "A first-time adopter may elect not to apply Ind AS 103 retrospectively
to past business combinations (business combinations that occurred before the date of
transition to Ind AS). However, if a first-time adopter restates any business combination
to comply with Ind AS 103, it shall restate all later business combinations and shall also
apply Ind AS 110 from that same date.
For example, if a first-time adopter elects to restate a business combination that occurred
on 30 June 20X0, it shall restate all business combinations that occurred between 30
June 20X0 and the date of transition to Ind AS, and it shall also apply Ind AS 110 from 30
June 20X0." Based on the above, if A Ltd. restates past business combinations, it would
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.20
FINANCIAL REPORTING
have to be applied to all business combinations of the group including those by subsidiary
B Ltd. for the purpose of Consolidated Financial Statements. Ind AS 101 states,
"However, if an entity becomes a first-time adopter later than its subsidiary (or associate
or joint venture) the entity shall, in its consolidated financial statements, measure the
assets and liabilities of the subsidiary (or associate or joint venture) at the same carrying
amounts as in the financial statements of the subsidiary (or associate or joint venture),
after adjusting for consolidation and equity accounting adjustments and for the effects of
the business combination in which the entity acquired the subsidiary." Thus, in case
where the parent adopts Ind AS later than the subsidiary (for example, if the parent is a
non-banking financial company and the subsidiary is a trading or manufacturing company)
then it does not change the amounts already recognised by the subsidiary.
*****
2. Insurance contracts
3.
Ind AS 104 will apply for annual periods beginning on or after date of transition to Ind AS.
If an insurer changes its accounting policies for insurance liabilities, it is permitted to
reclassify some or all of its financial assets as FVTPL (fair value through profit or loss).
Share based payment transactions
A first-time adopter is encouraged, but not required, to apply Ind AS 102, Share-based
Payment, to equity instruments that vested before date of transition to Ind AS.
However, a first-time adopter may apply Ind AS 102 to equity instruments, if it has
disclosed publicly the fair value of those equity instruments, determined at the
measurement date.
It is encouraged to apply Ind AS 102 to liabilities arising from share-based payment
transactions that were settled before the date of transition to Ind AS.
Illustration 7
X Ltd. is a first-time adopter of Ind AS. The date of transition is April 1, 20X1. It has
given 200 stock options to its employees. Out of these, 75 options have vested on
November 30, 20X0 and the remaining 125 will vest on November 30, 20X1.
What are the options available to X Ltd. at the date of transition?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.21
Solution
Ind AS 101 provides that a first-time adopter is encouraged, but not required, to apply
Ind AS 102 on 'Share-based Payment' to equity instruments that vested before the date
of transition to Ind AS. However, if a first-time adopter elects to apply Ind AS 102 to such
equity instruments, it may do so only if the entity has disclosed publicly the fair value of
those equity instruments, determined at the measurement date, as defined in Ind AS 102.
Having regard to the above, X Ltd. has the following options:
For 75 options that vested before the date of transition:
(a)
(b)
To apply Ind AS 102 and account for the same accordingly, provided it has
disclosed publicly the fair value of those equity instruments, determined at the
measurement date, as defined in Ind AS 102.
Not to apply Ind AS 102.
However, for all grants of equity instruments to which Ind AS 102 has not been
applied, i.e., equity instruments vested but not settled before date of transition to
Ind AS, X Ltd. would still need to disclose the information.
For 125 options that will vest after the date of transition: X Ltd. will need to account for
the same as per Ind AS 102.
*****
4.
Deemed cost for PPE, intangible assets and right of use assets
An entity has the following options with respect to measurement of its property, plant and
equipment (Ind AS 16), intangible assets (Ind AS 38) and right of use assets (Ind AS 116)
in the opening Ind AS balance sheet:
Measurement basis as per the respective standards applied retrospectively. This
measurement option can be applied on an item-by-item basis. For example, Plant
A can be measured applying Ind AS 16 retrospectively and Plant B can be
measured applying the "fair value" or "revaluation" options mentioned below.
Fair value at the date of transition to Ind AS. This measurement option can be
applied on an item-by-item basis in similar fashion as explained above.
Previous GAAP revaluation, if such revaluation was, at the date of revaluation,
broadly comparable to (a) fair value or (b) cost or depreciated cost in accordance
with other Ind AS adjusted to reflect changes in general or specific price index.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.22
FINANCIAL REPORTING
This measurement option can be applied on an item-by-item basis in similar
fashion as explained above.
Previous GAAP carrying amounts (provided there is no change in functional
currency). This measurement option can be applied only if applied to "all" of the
assets classes and items therein. In addition, this measurement option can be
applied to investment property (Ind AS 40) as well.
For Investment Property
Ind AS 40, Investment Property permits only the cost model. Therefore, option of availing
fair value as deemed cost for investment property is not available for first time adopters of
Ind AS for its financial statements.
Illustration 8
X Ltd. is the holding company of Y Ltd. X Ltd. is required to adopt Ind AS from April 1,
20X1. X Ltd. wants to avail the optional exemption of using the previous GAAP carrying
values in respect of its property, plant and equipment whereas Y Ltd. wants to use fair
value of its property, plant and equipment as its deemed cost on the date of transition.
Examine whether X Ltd. can do so for its consolidated financial statements. Also,
examine whether different entities in a group can use different basis for arriving at
deemed cost for property, plant and equipment in their respective standalone financial
statements
Solution
Where there is no change in its functional currency on the date of transition to Ind AS, a first-
time adopter to Ind AS may elect to continue with the carrying value of all of its property, plant
and equipment as at the date of transition measured as per the previous GAAP and use that
as its deemed cost at the date of transition after making necessary adjustments. If a first-time
adopter chooses this option then the option of applying this on selective basis to some of the
items of property, plant and equipment and using fair value for others is not available.
Nothing prevents different entities within a group to choose different basis for arriving at
deemed cost for the standalone financial statements. However, in Consolidated Financial
Statements, the entire group should be treated as one reporting entity. Accordingly, it will not
be permissible to use different basis for arriving at the deemed cost of property, plant and
equipment on the date of transition by different entities of the group for the purpose of
preparing Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.23
Illustration 9
For the purpose of deemed cost on the date of transition, an entity has the option of using
the carrying value as the deemed cost.
In this context, suggest which carrying value is to be considered as deemed cost: original
cost or net book value? Also examine whether this would have any impact on future
depreciation charge?
Solution
For the purpose of deemed cost on the date of transition, if an entity uses the carrying
value as the deemed cost, then it should consider the net book value on the date of
transition as the deemed cost and not the original cost because carrying value here
means net book value. The future depreciation charge will be based on the net book
value and the remaining useful life on the date of transition. Further, as per the
requirements of Ind AS 16, the depreciation method, residual value and useful life need to
be reviewed atleast annually. As a result of this, the depreciation charge may or may not
be the same as the depreciation charge under the previous GAAP.
*****
Illustration 10
Is it possible for an entity to allocate cost as per the previous GAAP to a component
based on its fair value on the date of transition even when it does not have the
component-wise historical cost?
Solution
Yes, an entity can allocate cost to a component based on its fair value on the date of
transition. This is permissible even when the entity does not have component-wise
historical cost.
*****
Illustration 11
Revaluation under previous GAAP can be considered as deemed cost if the revaluation
was, at the date of the revaluation, broadly comparable to fair value or cost or
depreciated cost of assets in accordance with Ind AS, adjusted to reflect, e.g., changes in
a general or specific price index.
What is the acceptable time gap of such revaluation from the date of transition? Can
adjustments be made to take effects of events subsequent to revaluation?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.24
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
There are no specific guidelines in Ind AS 101 to indicate the acceptable time gap of such
revaluation from the date of transition. The management of an entity needs to exercise
judgement in this regard. However, generally, a period of 2-3 years may be treated as
an acceptable time gap of such revaluation from the date of transition. In any case,
adjustments should be made to reflect the effect of material events subsequent to
revaluation.
*****
5.
6.
Cumulative translation difference
No need to:
Recognise some translation differences in other comprehensive income.
Reclassify cumulative translation differences for foreign operation from entity to
profit or loss as part of gain or loss on its disposal
If first time adopter uses this exemption:
Cumulative translation differences set to zero for all foreign operations.
Gain / loss on subsequent disposal of a foreign operation shall exclude these
differences that arose before transition
Long-term foreign currency monetary items
Paragraph 46A of AS 11 notified under the Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules,
2006 permitted companies to recognise foreign currency exchange gain / loss arising on
long-term foreign currency monetary items in either of the following ways:
In profit or loss
If such monetary item was entered into to acquire property, plant and equipment or
intangible asset - in the cost thereof
If such monetary item was entered into for any other purpose accumulated in foreign
currency monetary item translation difference account (FCMITDA)
A first time adopter may continue the accounting policy adopted for accounting for
exchange differences arising from long term foreign currency monetary items recognised
in the financial statements for the period ending immediately before the beginning of the
first Ind AS financial reporting period, as per previous GAAP.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.25
To be clear, this exemption is not a permanent exemption from the requirements of
Ind AS 21. It is available only for those long-term foreign currency monetary items which
are recognised before the first Ind AS reporting period began. For example, if the
transition date is 1 April 20X5, the first reporting period will be 1 April 20X6 to 31 March
20X7. Therefore, this exemption is available only if such monetary items were
recognised in the last previous GAAP financial statements i.e. financial statements for the
year ended 31 March 20X6.
Illustration 12
Y Ltd. is a first time adopter of Ind AS. The date of transition is April 1, 20X1. On the
date of transition, there is a long-term foreign currency monetary liability of  60 crores
(US \$ 10 million converted at an exchange rate of US \$ $1=\mp2160)$. The accumulated
exchange difference on the date of transition is nil since Y Ltd. was following AS 11
notified under the Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2006 and has not exercised
the option provided in paragraph 46/46A of AS 11. The Company wants to avail the
option under paragraph 46A of AS 11 prospectively or retrospectively on the date of
transition to Ind AS.
How should it account for the translation differences in respect of this item under
Ind AS 101?
Solution
Ind AS 101 provides that a first-time adopter may continue the policy adopted for accounting
for exchange differences arising from translation of long-term foreign currency monetary items
recognised in the financial statements for the period ending immediately before the beginning
of the first Ind AS financial reporting period as per the previous GAAP.
If the Company wants to avail the option prospectively
The Company cannot avail the exemption given in Ind AS 101 and cannot exercise option
under paragraph 46/46A of AS 11, prospectively, on the date of transition to Ind AS in
respect of Long term foreign currency monetary liability existing on the date of transition
as the company has not availed the option under paragraph 46/46A earlier. Therefore,
the Company need to recognise the exchange differences in accordance with the
requirements of Ind AS 21, The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates which
requires all foreign exchange differences to be recognised in profit or loss, except such
foreign exchange differences which are accounted for as an adjustment to borrowing
costs in accordance with Ind AS 23.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.
14.26
FINANCIAL REPORTING
If the Company wants to avail the option retrospectively
The Company cannot avail the exemption given in Ind AS 101 and cannot exercise the
option under paragraph 46/46A of AS 11 retrospectively on the date of transition to Ind
AS in respect of long-term foreign currency monetary liability that existed on the date of
transition since the option is available only if it is in continuation of the accounting policy
followed in accordance with the previous GAAP. Y Ltd. has not been using the option
provided in Para 46/ 46A of AS 11, hence, it will not be permitted to use the option given
in Ind AS 101 retrospectively.
*****
Illustration 13
Y Ltd. is a first time adopter of Ind AS. The date of transition is April 1, 20X5. On April 1,
20X1, it obtained a 7 year US\$ 1,00,000 loan. It has been exercising the option provided
in Paragraph 46/46A of AS 11 and has been amortising the exchange differences in
respect of this loan over the balance period of such loan. On the date of transition, the
company wants to continue the same accounting policy with regard to amortising
exchange differences.
Whether the Company is permitted to do so?
Solution
Ind AS 101 provides that a first-time adopter may continue the policy adopted for
accounting for exchange differences arising from translation of long-term foreign currency
monetary items recognised in the financial statements for the period ending immediately
before the beginning of the first Ind AS financial reporting period as per the previous
GAAP. In view of the above, the Company can continue to follow the existing accounting
policy of amortising the exchange differences in respect of this loan over the balance
period of such long-term liability.
*****
Investment in subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates
Ind AS 27 requires measurement of investments in subsidiaries, joint ventures and
associates either at (a) cost or (b) in accordance with Ind AS 109 (i.e. at fair value, either
through other comprehensive income or through profit or loss).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
8.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.27
Ind AS 101 permits a first-time adopter to measure such investments at:
Cost determined in accordance with Ind AS 27 (as above) or
Deemed cost:
Ο
Ο
Fair value at the date of transition; or
Illustration 14
Previous GAAP carrying amount at the date of transition.
A Ltd. acquired B Ltd. in a business combination transaction. A Ltd. agreed to pay certain
contingent consideration (liability classified) to B Ltd. As part of its investment in its
separate financial statements, A Ltd. did not recognise the said contingent consideration
(since it was not considered probable). A Ltd. considered the previous GAAP carrying
amounts of investment as its deemed cost on first-time adoption.
In that case, does the carrying amount of investment required to be adjusted for this
transaction?
Solution
In accordance with Ind AS 101, an entity has an option to treat the previous GAAP
carrying values, as at the date of transition, of investments in subsidiaries, associates
and joint ventures as its deemed cost on transition to Ind AS. If such an exemption is
adopted, then the carrying values of such investments are not adjusted. Accordingly, any
adjustments in relation to recognition of contingent consideration on first time adoption
shall be made in the statement of profit and loss.
*****
Compound financial instruments
A first time adopter need not split the compound financial instruments into separate
liability and equity component, if liability component is not outstanding as at transition
date.
Illustration 15
On April 1, 20X1, Sigma Ltd. issued 30,000 6% convertible debentures of face value of
100 per debenture at par. The debentures are redeemable at a premium of 10% on
31 March 20X5 or these may be converted into ordinary shares at the option of the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.28
FINANCIAL REPORTING
holder. The interest rate for equivalent debentures without conversion rights would have
been 10%. The date of transition to Ind AS is 1 April 20X3.
Suggest how should Sigma Ltd. account for this compound financial instrument on the
date of transition. The present value of 1 receivable at the end of each year based on
discount rates of 6% and 10% can be taken as:
Solution
The carrying amount of the debenture on the date of transition under previous GAAP,
assuming that all interest accrued other than premium on redemption have been paid, will
be 31,50,000 $[(30,000\times100)+(30,000\times100\times10/100\times2/4)]$. The premium payable
on redemption is being recognised as borrowing costs as per para $4(b)$ of AS 16 ie under
previous GAAP on straight-line basis.
As per para D18 of Ind AS 101, Ind AS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation, requires an
entity to split a compound financial instrument at inception into separate liability and equity
components. If the liability component is no longer outstanding, retrospective application of
Ind AS 32 would involve separating two portions of equity. The first portion is recognised in
retained earnings and represents the cumulative interest accreted on the liability
component. The other portion represents the original equity component. However, in
accordance with this Ind AS, a first-time adopter need not separate these two portions if the
liability component is no longer outstanding at the date of transition to Ind AS.
In the present case, since the liability is outstanding on the date of transition, Sigma Ltd.
will need to split the convertible debentures into debt and equity portion on the date of
transition. Accordingly, we will first measure the liability component by discounting the
contractually determined stream of future cash flows (interest and principal) to present
value by using the discount rate of 10% p.a. (being the market interest rate for similar
debentures with no conversion option).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.29
Thus, on the date of initial recognition, the amount of 30,00,000 being the amount of
debentures will be split as under:
However, on the date of transition, unwinding of 28,14,600 will be done for two years as
follows:
Therefore, on transition date, Sigma Ltd. shall -
a. recognise the carrying amount of convertible debentures at 30,27,666;
b.
C.
d.
Notes:
recognise equity component of compound financial instrument of  1,85,400;
debit 63,066 to retained earnings being the difference between the previous
GAAP amount of 31,50,000 and 30,27,666 and the equity component of
compound financial instrument of 1,85,400; and
derecognise the debenture liability in previous GAAP of 31,50,000.
1.
3.17 is present value of annuity factor of 1 at a discount rate of 10% for 4 years.
2.
On maturity, 110 will be paid ( 100 as principal payment + 10 as premium)
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
9.
14.30
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Fair value measurement of financial assets or financial liabilities
As per Ind AS 109, if:
the fair value of the financial asset or financial liability at initial recognition differs
from the transaction price, and
such fair value is not based on:
Level 1 inputs (refer Ind AS 113), or
10.
Ο
Valuation technique that uses only data from observable markets
then, such difference (referred to in first bullet above) is deferred and amortised in profit
or loss on the basis stated in Ind AS 109.
Ind AS 101 permits an entity to apply this requirement of Ind AS 109 prospectively to
transactions entered into on or after the date of transition.
Decommissioning liabilities included in Property, Plant and Equipment
Appendix 'A' to Ind AS 16 "Changes in Existing Decommissioning, Restoration and
Similar Liabilities requires specified changes in a decommissioning, restoration or similar
liability to be added to or deducted from the cost of the asset to which it relates; the
adjusted depreciable amount of the asset is then depreciated prospectively over its
remaining useful life.
An entity need not comply with this requirement for changes in such liabilities that
occurred before the date of transition. If an entity avails of this exemption, it shall:
Measure the liability as at the transition date as per Ind AS 37 i.e. based on the
facts and circumstances, including the risk-adjusted discount rate, as at the
transition date,
If the liability is in the scope of Appendix A to Ind AS 16, roll-back that liability to
the date that liability first arose using best estimate of historical risk-adjusted
discount rate and include it in the cost of the asset, and
Calculate accumulated depreciation on the transition date on the basis of
estimated useful life as at that date.
11. Designation of previously recognised financial instruments
All financial instruments are initially measured at fair value. As regards subsequent
measurement, Ind AS 109 permits that upon initial recognition, an entity may designate
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.31
financial instruments as subsequently measured at fair value if certain criteria are met.
Ind AS 101 exempts an entity from retrospective designation of financial instruments and
permits that such designation be done on the basis of the facts and circumstances that
exist at the date of transition to Ind AS. In particular the exemption is provided for below
mentioned financial instruments:
Designation of any financial liability or asset at fair value through profit or loss
Designation of investment in an equity instrument at fair value through other
comprehensive income
12. Extinguishing financial liabilities with equity instruments
Appendix D of Ind AS 109 provides for accounting principles to be applied when an entity's
equity instruments are issued to extinguish all or part of its financial liability. A first time
adopter may apply Appendix D of Ind AS 109 from the date of transition to Ind AS.
13. Severe Hyperinflation
14.
In hyperinflationary economy, when an entity's date of transition to Ind AS, is on, or after,
the functional currency normalization date, then all assets and liabilities held before the
functional currency normalization date may be measured at fair value on the date of
transition.
This fair value may be used as deemed cost of those assets and liabilities in the opening
Ind AS statement of financial position.
When the functional currency normalisation date falls within a 12 month comparative
period, the comparative period may be less than 12 months, provided that a complete set
of financial statements (as required by paragraph 10 of Ind AS 1) is provided for that
shorter period.
Leases
A first time adopter may determine whether an arrangement existing at the date of
transition to Ind AS contain a lease (including classification by a lessor of each land and
building element as finance or an operating lease) on the basis of facts and
circumstances existing on the date of transition.
A lessee which is a first-time adopter of Ind AS shall recognise lease liabilities and right-
of-use assets, by applying the following approach to all of its leases at the date of
transition to Ind AS:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
15.
14.32
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(a) measure a lease liability at the present value of the remaining lease payments
discounted using the lessee's incremental borrowing rate at the date of transition
to Ind AS;
(b)
measure a right-of-use asset on a lease-by-lease basis either at:
(i)
(ii)
its carrying amount as if Ind AS 116 had been applied since the
commencement date of the lease, but discounted using the lessee's
incremental borrowing rate at the date of transition to Ind AS; or
an amount equal to the lease liability, adjusted by the amount of any prepaid
or accrued lease payments relating to that lease recognised in the Balance
Sheet immediately before the date of transition to Ind AS.
(c) apply Ind AS 36 to right-of-use assets.
A first-time adopter that is a lessee may do one or more of the following at the date of
transition to Ind AS, applied on a lease-by lease basis:
(1)
(2)
apply a single discount rate to a portfolio of leases with reasonably similar
characteristics.
elect not to apply the above requirements given in (a) to (c) to leases for which the
lease term ends within 12 months of the date of transition to Ind AS. Instead, the
entity shall account for (including disclosure of information about) these leases as
if they were short-term leases accounted as per Ind AS 116.
(3)
elect not to apply the above requirements given in (a) to (c) to leases for which the
underlying asset is of low value. Instead, the entity shall account for (including
disclosure of information about) these leases as per Ind AS 116.
(4)
(5)
exclude initial direct costs from the measurement of the right-of-use asset at the
date of transition to Ind AS.
use hindsight, such as in determining the lease term if the contract contains
options to extend or terminate the lease.
Financial asset or intangible assets accounted for in accordance with Appendix D
to Ind AS 115, Service Concession Arrangements
Change in accounting policy pursuant to the requirements of this Appendix to be
accounted for retrospectively except for amortization policy for intangible assets relating
to toll roads adopted as per previous GAAP.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.33
16.
If impracticable for an operator to apply the requirements of the Ind AS retrospectively at
the date of transition to Ind AS, it shall recognise financial assets and intangible assets
that existed at the date of transition to Ind AS using the previous carrying amounts.
Designation of contracts to buy or sell a non-financial item
Ind AS 109 permits some contracts to buy or sell a non-financial item to be designated at
inception as measured at fair value through profit or loss (see paragraph 2.5 of Ind AS
109). Despite this requirement an entity is permitted to designate, at the date of
transition to Ind AS, contracts that already exist on that date as measured at fair value
through profit or loss but only if they meet the requirements of paragraph 2.5 of Ind AS
109 at that date and the entity designates all similar contracts.
17. Striping costs in the production of surface mine
A first time adopter may apply Appendix B to Ind AS 16, Stripping costs in the production
phase of a surface mine, from the date of transition to Ind AS. As at the transition date to
Ind AS, any previously recognised asset balance that resulted from stripping activity
undertaken during the production phase shall be reclassified as a part of an existing
asset to which the stripping activity related, to the extent that there remains an
identifiable component of the ore body with which the predecessor stripping asset can be
associated.
18. Non-current assets held for sale and discounted operations
A first time adopter can:
Measure noncurrent assets held for sale or discontinued operation at the lower
carrying value and fair value less cost to sell at the date of transition to Ind AS in
accordance with Ind AS 105; and
Recognize directly in retain earnings any difference between that amount and the
carrying amount of those assets at the date of transition to Ind AS determined
under the entity's previous GAAP
19. Assets and liabilities of subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures
If a subsidiary becomes a first-time adopter later than its parent, the subsidiary shall
measure its assets and liabilities at either:
The carrying amounts that would be included in the parent's consolidated financial
statements, based on the parent's date of transition to Ind AS. or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.34
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The carrying amounts required by Ind AS 101, based on the subsidiary's date of
transition to Ind AS.
If an entity becomes first time adopter later than its subsidiary, the entity shall measure
the assets and liabilities at the subsidiary at the same carrying amounts as in the financial
statements of the subsidiary, after adjusting for consolidation and equity accounting
adjustments and for the effects of the business combination in which the entity acquired
the subsidy.
20. Revenue from Contract with Customers
Any of the following exemption may be used in applying Ind AS 115 retrospectively:
For completed contracts: Need not restate contracts that begin and end within the
same annual reporting period;
For completed contracts that have variable consideration: Option to use the
transaction price at the date the contract was completed rather than estimating
variable consideration amounts in the comparative reporting periods;
For all reporting periods presented before the beginning of the first Ind AS
reporting period, an entity need not disclose the amount of the transaction price
allocated to the remaining performance obligations and an explanation of when the
entity expects to recognize that amount as revenue.
21. Joint arrangements:
Transition from Proportionate Consolidation to Equity Method
To measure initial investment at transition date at the aggregate of carrying
amount of assets and liabilities that the entity had previously proportionately
consolidated including goodwill arising on acquisition.
To test the investment for impairment, regardless of whether there are indicators of
such impairment. Any resulting impairment shall be recognised as an adjustment
to retained earnings at the date of transition to Ind AS.
If aggregate of all previously recognized assets/liabilities results in negative asset
and if having legal or constructive obligation, then recognize corresponding liability
otherwise adjust retained earnings.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
 .
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
Transition from Equity Method to accounting for assets and liabilities
14.35
To derecognize previous investment and recognize share of each asset and
liability in respect of its interest in joint operation.
Difference between amount of net assets (including goodwill) as per Ind AS and
previously recognized;
(a)
(b)
If carrying amount of previous investment is lower:
Offset against goodwill relating to investment and thereafter retained
earning
If carrying amount of previous investment is higher:
Adjust against retained earning
Transitional provisions in entity's Separate FS
To derecognise the investment and recognise assets and liabilities as per
transition from equity method to accounting for assets and liabilities
Provide reconciliation between amount derecognized, recognized and adjustment
to retained earnings.
7. PRESENTATION AND DISCLOSURE
Comparative Information
• Ind AS does not require historical summaries to comply with the recognition and
measurement requirement of Ind AS.
•
In any financial statements containing historical summaries or comparative
information in accordance with previous GAAP, an entity shall:
Label the previous GAAP information prominently as not being prepared in
accordance with Ind AS; and
Disclose the nature of the main adjustments that would make it comply with
Ind AS. An entity need not quantify those adjustments.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
II.
14.36
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Explanation of transition to Ind AS
•
•
Reconciliation of
(a)
Equity from previous GAAP to Ind AS at transition and last year end;
(b)
Last year's total comprehensive income under previous GAAP to Ind AS.
Sufficient detail to understand adjustments to each line item.
•
•
•
•
Reconciliation to distinguish correction of errors identified during transition from
change in accounting policy.
Fair value as deemed cost and the amount of the adjustment.
Ind AS 36 disclosures for impairment during transition.
If adopted first time exemption option, to disclose the fact and accounting policy
until such time those PPE, Intangible Assets, investment properties or intangible
assets significantly depreciated/impaired/derecognized.
• Interim financial reports to include reconciliation with equity and profit or loss under
previous GAAP.
•
Further information to comply with Ind AS 34.
Illustration 16
H Ltd. has the following assets and liabilities as at March 31, 20X1, prepared in accordance with
previous GAAP:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.37
The following GAAP differences were identified by the Company on first-time adoption of Ind AS
with effect from April 1, 20X1:
1.
In relation to property, plant and equipment, the following adjustments were identified:
2.
3.
Property, plant and equipment comprise land held for capital appreciation
purposes costing  4,50,000 and was classified as investment property as per Ind
AS 40.
Exchange differences of  1,00,000 were capitalised to depreciable property, plant
and equipment on which accumulated depreciation of ₹40,000 was recognised.
There were no asset retirement obligations.
The management intends to adopt deemed cost exemption for using the previous
GAAP carrying values as deemed cost as at the date of transition for PPE and
investment property.
The Company had made an investment in S Ltd. (subsidiary of H Ltd.) for 48,00,000
that carried a fair value of  68,00,000 as at the transition date. The Company intends to
recognise the investment at its fair value as at the date of transition.
Financial instruments:
VAT deferral loan ₹60,00,000 :
The VAT deferral loan of ₹60,00,000 was obtained on March 31, 20X1, for setting
up a business in a backward region with a condition to create certain defined
targets for employment of local population of that region. The loan does not carry
any interest and is repayable in full at the end of 5 years. In accordance with Ind
AS 109, the discount factor on the loan is to be taken as 10%, being the
incremental borrowing rate. Accordingly, the fair value of the loan as at March 31,
20X1, is 37,25,528. The entity chooses to exercise the option given in
paragraph B11 of Ind AS 101, i.e., the entity chooses to apply the requirements of
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.38
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.
Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments and Ind AS 20, Accounting for Government
Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance, retrospectively as required
information had been obtained at the time of initially accounting for VAT deferral
loan
The retained earnings of the Company contained the following:
ESOP reserve of 20,000:
The Company had granted 1,000 options to employees out of which 800 have
already vested. The Company followed an intrinsic value method for recognition of
ESOP charge and recognised 12,000 towards the vested options and 8,000
over a period of time as ESOP charge and a corresponding reserve. If fair value
method had been followed in accordance with Ind AS 102, the corresponding
charge would have been 15,000 and  9,000 for the vested and unvested shares
respectively. The Company intends to avail Ind AS 101 exemption for share-based
payments for not restating the ESOP charge as per previous GAAP for vested
options.
Cumulative translation difference :
The Company had a non-integral foreign branch in accordance with AS 11 and had
recognised a balance of  1,00,000 as part of reserves. On first-time adoption of
Ind AS, the Company intends to avail Ind AS 101 exemption of resetting the
cumulative translation difference to zero.
Prepare transition date Ind AS balance sheet of Company H showing adjustments to the values
of assets and liabilities.
Solution
Adjustments for opening balance sheet as per Ind AS 101
1. Property, Plant & Equipment: As the land held for capital appreciation purposes
qualifies as investment property, such investment property should be reclassified from
property, plant and equipment (PPE) to investment property and presented separately.
As the Company has adopted the previous GAAP carrying values as deemed cost, all
items of PPE and investment property should be carried at its previous GAAP carrying
values. As such, the past capitalised exchange differences require no adjustment in this
case.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.39
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Investment in subsidiary: On first time adoption of Ind AS, a parent company has an
option to carry its investment in subsidiary at fair value as at the date of transition in its
separate financial statements. As such, the company can recognise such investment at a
value of 68,00,000.
Financial instruments: As the VAT deferral loan is a financial liability under Ind AS 109,
that liability should be recognised at its present value discounted at an appropriate
discounting factor. Consequently, the VAT deferral loan should be recognised at
37,25,528 and the remaining 22,74,472 would be recognised as deferred government
grant.
ESOPs: Ind AS 101 provides an exemption of not restating the accounting as per the
previous GAAP in accordance with Ind AS 102 for all options that have vested by the
transition date. Accordingly, out of 1000 ESOPs granted, the first-time adoption
exemption is available on 800 options that have already vested. As such, its accounting
need not be restated. However, the 200 options that are not vested as at the transition
date, need to be restated in accordance with Ind AS 102. As such, the additional impact
of 1,000 (i.e., 9,000 less 8,000) would be recognised in the opening Ind AS balance
sheet.
Cumulative translation difference: As per paragraph D12 of Ind AS 101, the first-time
adopter can avail an exemption regarding requirements of Ind AS 21 in context of
cumulative translation differences. If a first-time adopter uses this exemption the
cumulative translation differences for all foreign operation are deemed to be zero as at
the transition date. In that case, the balance is transferred to retained earnings. As
such, the balance of  1,00,000 should be transferred to retained earnings
Retained earnings:
The transition date Ind AS Balance Sheet after the above adjustments in the carrying
values of assets and liabilities is as under:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.40
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Transition date Ind AS Balance Sheet of H Ltd. as at 1st April, 20X1
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.41
Illustration 17
Shaurya Limited is the company having its registered and corporate office at New Delhi.
60% of Shaurya Limited's shares are held by the Government of India and rest by other
investors.
This is the first time that Shaurya limited would be applying Ind AS for the preparation of
its financials for the current financial year 20X3-20X4. Following balance sheet is
prepared as per earlier GAAP as at the beginning of the preceding period along with the
additional information:
Balance Sheet as at 31 March 20X2
(All figures are in '000, unless otherwise specified)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.42
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(2)
TOTAL
Additional Information (All figures are in '000) :
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Other current liabilities include₹3,90,000 liabilities to be paid in cash such as
expense payable, salary payable etc. and ₹60,000 are statutory government dues.
Long term loans and advances include 40,000 loan and the remaining amount
consists of Advance to staff of 1,10,000.
Other non-current assets of  2,00,000 consists of Capital advances to suppliers.
Other current assets include
Prepaid expenses of ₹50,000.
3,50,000 current assets receivable in cash and
Short term provisions include Dividend payable of 2,00,000. The dividend
payable had been as a result of board meeting wherein the declaration of dividend
for financial year 20X1-20X2 was made. However, it is subject to approval of
shareholders in the annual general meeting.
Chief financial officer of Shaurya Limited has also presented the following information
against corresponding relevant items in the balance sheet:
a) Property, Plant & Equipment consists of a class of assets as office buildings whose
carrying amount is  10,00,000. However, the fair value of said office building as
on the date of transition is estimated to be 15,00,000. The company wants to
follow revaluation model as its accounting policy in respect of its property, plant
and equipment for the first annual Ind AS financial statements.
b)
The fair value of Intangible assets as on the date of transition is estimated to be
2,50,000. However, the management is reluctant to incorporate the fair value
changes in the books of account.
c)
Shaurya Ltd. had acquired 80% shares in a company, Excel Private Limited few
years ago thereby acquiring the control upon it at that time. Shaurya Ltd.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.43
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
recognised goodwill as per erstwhile accounting standards by accounting the
excess of consideration paid over the net assets acquired at the date of
acquisition. Fair value exercise was not done at the time of acquisition.
Trade receivables include an amount of 20,000 as provision for doubtful debts
measured in accordance with previous GAAP. Now as per latest estimates using
hindsights, the provision needs to be revised to  25,000.
Company had given a loan of  1,00,000 to an entity for the term of 10 years six
years ago. Transaction costs were incurred separately for this loan. The loan
carries an interest rate of 7%. The principal amount is to be repaid in equal
installments over the period of ten years at the year end. Interest is also payable
at each year end. The fair value of loan as on the date of transition is ₹50,000 as
against the carrying amount of loan which at present amounts to  40,000.
However, Ind AS 109 mandates to recognise the interest income as per effective
interest method after the adjustment of transaction costs. Management says it is
tedious task in the given case to apply the effective interest rate changes with
retrospective effect and hence is reluctant to apply the same retrospectively in its
first-time adoption.
In the long-term borrowings,  4,50,000 of component is due towards the State
Government. Interest is payable on the government loan at 4%, however the
prevailing rate in the market at present is 8%. The fair market value of loan stands
at 4,20,000 as on the relevant date.
Under Previous GAAP, the mutual funds were measured at cost or market value,
whichever is lower. Under Ind AS, the Company has designated these
investments at fair value through profit or loss. The value of mutual funds as per
previous GAAP is  2,00,000 as included in 'current investment'. However, the fair
value of mutual funds as on the date of transition is  2,30,000.
Ignore separate calculation of deferred tax on above adjustments. Assume the net
deferred tax income to be ₹50,000 on account of Ind AS transition adjustments.
Requirements:
Prepare transition date balance sheet of Shaurya Limited as per Indian Accounting
Standards
Show necessary explanation for each of the items presented by chief financial
officer in the form of notes, which may or may not require the adjustment as on the
date of transition.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.44
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
Transition date (opening) IND-AS Balance Sheet of Shaurya Limited
As at 1 April 20X2
(All figures are in '000, unless otherwise specified)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.45
OTHER EQUITY
Working Note 1:
Disclosure forming part of financial statements:
Proposed dividend on equity shares is subject to the approval of the shareholders of the
company at the annual general meeting and should not recognized as liability as at the Balance
Sheet date.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.46
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Note 1: Property, plant & Equipment:
As per para D5 of Ind AS 101, an entity may elect to measure an item of property, plant and
equipment at the date of transition to Ind AS at its fair value and use that fair value as its
deemed cost at that date.
Para D7AA has to be applied for all items of property, plant and equipment. So, if D5 exemption
is taken for buildings, Ind AS will have to be applied retrospectively for other assets as well.
Since, an entity elect to measure an item of property, plant and equipment at the date of
transition to Ind AS at its fair value and use that fair value as its deemed cost at that date, it is
assumed that the carrying amount of other assets based on retrospective application of Ind AS
is equal to their fair value of 10 lakhs.
Note 2: Goodwill:
Ind AS 103 mandatorily requires measuring the assets and liabilities of the acquiree at its fair
value as on the date of acquisition. However, a first time adopter may elect to not apply the
provisions of Ind AS 103 with retrospective effect that occurred prior to the date of transition to
Ind AS.
Hence company can continue to carry the goodwill in its books of account as per the previous
GAAP.
Note 3: Intangible assets:
Para D7 read with D6 of Ind AS 101 states that a first-time adopter may elect to use a previous
GAAP revaluation at, or before, the date of transition to Ind AS as deemed cost at the date of
the revaluation, if the revaluation was, at the date of the revaluation, broadly comparable to:
(a)
(b)
Fair value; or
Cost or depreciated cost in accordance with Ind AS, adjusted to reflect, for example,
changes in a general or specific price index.
However, there is a requirement that Intangible assets must meet the definition and recognition
criteria as per Ind AS 38.
Hence, company can avail the exemption given in Ind AS 101 as on the date of transition to use
the carrying value as per previous GAAP.
Note 4: Loan:
Para B8C of Ind AS 101 states that if it is impracticable (as defined in Ind AS 8) for an entity to
apply retrospectively the effective interest method in Ind AS 109, the fair value of the financial
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.47
asset or the financial liability at the date of transition to Ind ASs shall be the new gross carrying
amount of that financial asset or the new amortised cost of that financial liability at the date of
transition to Ind AS.
Accordingly, 50,000 would be the gross carrying amount of loan and difference of  10,000
( 50,000-40,000) would be adjusted to retained earnings.
Note 5: Mutual Funds:
Para 29 of Ind AS 101 states that an entity is permitted to designate a previously recognised
financial asset as a financial asset measured at fair value through profit or loss in accordance
with paragraph D19A. The entity shall disclose the fair value of financial assets so designated
at the date of designation and their classification and carrying amount in the previous financial
statements.
D19A states that an entity may designate a financial asset as measured at fair value through
profit or loss in accordance with Ind AS 109 on the basis of the facts and circumstances that
exist at the date of transition to Ind AS.
Note 6: Trade receivables:
Para 14 of Ind AS 101 states that an entity's estimates in accordance with Ind AS at the date of
transition to Ind AS shall be consistent with estimates made for the same date in accordance
with previous GAAP (after adjustments to reflect any difference in accounting policies), unless
there is objective evidence that those estimates were in error.
Para 15 of Ind AS 101 further states that an entity may receive information after the date of
transition to Ind AS about estimates that it had made under previous GAAP. In accordance with
paragraph 14, an entity shall treat the receipt of that information in the same way as non-
adjusting events after the reporting period in accordance with Ind AS 10, Events after the
Reporting Period.
The entity shall not reflect that new information in its opening Ind AS Balance Sheet (unless the
estimates need adjustment for any differences in accounting policies or there is objective evidence
that the estimates were in error). Instead, the entity shall reflect that new information in profit or
loss (or, if appropriate, other comprehensive income) for the year ended 31 March 20X3.
Note 7: Government Grant:
Para 10A of Ind AS 20 states that the benefit of a government loan at a below-market rate of
interest is treated as a government grant. The loan shall be recognised and measured in
accordance with Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments. The benefit of the below-market rate of
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.48
FINANCIAL REPORTING
interest shall be measured as the difference between the initial carrying value of the loan
determined in accordance with Ind AS 109, and the proceeds received. The benefit is
accounted for in accordance with this Standard.
However, Para B10 of Ind AS 101 states, a first-time adopter shall classify all government loans
received as a financial liability or an equity instrument in accordance with Ind AS 32, Financial
Instruments: Presentation. Except as permitted by paragraph B11, a first-time adopter shall
apply the requirements in Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments, and Ind AS 20, Accounting for
Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance, prospectively to government
loans existing at the date of transition to Ind ASs and shall not recognise the corresponding
benefit of the government loan at a below-market rate of interest as a government grant.
Consequently, if a first-time adopter did not, under its previous GAAP, recognise and measure a
government loan at a below-market rate of interest on a basis consistent with Ind AS
requirements, it shall use its previous GAAP carrying amount of the loan at the date of transition
to Ind AS as the carrying amount of the loan in the opening Ind AS Balance Sheet. An entity
shall apply Ind AS 109 to the measurement of such loans after the date of transition to Ind AS.
Note 8: Dividend
Dividend should be deducted from retained earnings during the year when it has been declared
and approved. Accordingly, the provision declared for preceding year should be reversed (to
rectify the wrong entry). Retained earnings would increase proportionately due to such
adjustment.
*****
(i)
8. CARVE OUTS IN IND AS 101 FROM IFRS 1
Definition of previous GAAP under Ind AS 101
As per IFRS
IFRS 1 defines previous GAAP as the basis of accounting that a first time adopter used
immediately before adopting IFRS.
Carve out
Ind AS 101 defines previous GAAP as the basis of accounting that a first-time adopter
used for its reporting requirement in India immediately before adopting Ind AS. The
change made it mandatory for Indian entities to consider the financial statements
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.49
prepared in accordance with notified Accounting Standards as was applicable to them as
previous GAAP when it transitions to Ind AS.
Reason
The change makes it mandatory for Indian companies to consider the financial statements
prepared in accordance with Accounting Standards notified under the Companies
(Accounting Standards) Rules, 2006 as previous GAAP when it transitions to Ind AS as
the law prevailing in India recognises only the financial statements prepared in
accordance with the Companies Act, 2013.
(ii) Allowing the use of carrying cost of Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) on the
date of transition of Ind AS 101
As per IFRS
IFRS 1 First time Adoption of International Accounting Standards provides that on the
date of transition, either the items of Property, Plant and Equipment shall be determined
by applying IAS 16 Property, Plant and Equipment retrospectively or the same should be
recorded at fair value or a previous GAAP revaluation, subject to certain requirements.
Carve out
Paragraph D7AA of Ind AS 101 provides an additional option to use carrying values of all
items of property, plant and equipment on the date of transition in accordance with
previous GAAP as an acceptable starting point under Ind AS.
Reason
In the case of old companies, retrospective application of Ind AS 16 or fair values at the
date of transition to determine deemed cost may not be possible for old assets.
Accordingly, Ind AS 101 provides relief to an entity to use carrying values of all items of
property, plant and equipment on the date of transition in accordance with previous GAAP
as an acceptable starting point under Ind AS.
(iii) Long Term Foreign Currency Monetary Items
As per IFRS
No provision in IFRS 1.
Carve out
Paragraph D13AA of Appendix D to Ind AS 101 provides that a first-time adopter may
continue the policy adopted for accounting for exchange differences arising from
translation of long-term foreign currency monetary items recognised in the financial
statements for the period ending immediately before the beginning of the first Ind AS
financial reporting period as per the previous GAAP. Consequently, Ind AS 21 also
provides that it does not apply to long-term foreign currency monetary items for which an
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.50
FINANCIAL REPORTING
entity has opted for the exemption given in paragraph D13AA of Appendix D to Ind AS
101. Such an entity may continue to apply the accounting policy so opted for such long-
term foreign currency monetary items.
Reason
Para 46A of AS 11 provides an option to recognise long term foreign currency monetary
items as a part of the cost of property, plant and equipment or to defer its recognition in
the statement of profit and loss over the period of loan in case the loan is not related to
acquisition of fixed assets. To provide transitional relief, such entities have been given
an option to continue the capitalisation or deferment of exchange differences, as the case
may be, on foreign currency borrowings obtained before the beginning of first Ind AS
reporting period.
(iv) Intangible assets arising from service concession arrangements related to toll
roads accounted for in accordance with Appendix D, Service Concession
Arrangements to Ind AS 115, Revenue from Contracts with Customers
As per IFRS
No provision in IFRS 1.
Carve Out
Ind AS 101 permits a first-time adopter to continue with the policy adopted for
amortization of intangible assets arising from service concession arrangements related to
toll roads recognised in the financial statements for the period ending immediately before
the beginning of the first Ind AS financial reporting period as per the previous GAAP.
As a consequence to the above, paragraph 7AA has been inserted in Ind AS 38 to scope
out the entity, to apply amortisation method, that opts to amortise the intangible assets
arising from service concession arrangements in respect of toll roads recognised in the
financial statements for the period ending immediately before the beginning of the first
Ind AS reporting period as per the exception given in paragraph D22 of Appendix D to
Ind AS 101.
Reason
Schedule II to the Companies Act, 2013, allows companies to use revenue based
amortisation of intangible assets arising from service concession arrangements related to
toll roads while Ind AS 38, Intangible Assets, allows revenue based amortisation only in
the circumstances in which the predominant limiting factor that is inherent in an intangible
asset is the achievement of revenue threshold. In order to provide relief to such entities,
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.51
(v)
Ind AS 38 and Ind AS 101 have been amended to allow the entities to continue to use the
accounting policy adopted for amortization of intangible assets arising from service
concession arrangements related to toll roads recognised in the financial statements for
the period ending immediately before the beginning of the first Ind AS financial
statements. In other words, Ind AS 38 would be applicable to the amortisation of
intangible assets arising from service concession arrangements related to toll roads
entered into after the implementation of Ind AS.
Land and building element in lease contracts
As per IFRS
No provisions under IFRS 1.
Carve Out
Paragraph D9AA provides that an entity which is a lessor can use the transition date facts
and circumstances for lease arrangements which includes both land and building
elements to assess the classification of each element as finance or an operating lease at
the transition date to Ind AS. Also, if there is any land lease newly classified as finance
lease then the first time adopter may recognise assets and liability at fair value on that
date; any difference between those fair values is recognised in retained earnings.
Reason
This aspect is quite common in the Indian environment and it was felt that the first time
adopters may face hardship if they were to retrospectively assess the two elements of the
contract.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.52
FINANCIAL REPORTING
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
2.
3.
Company A intends to restate its past business combinations with effect from 30 June
20X0 (being a date prior to the transition date).
If business combinations are restated, whether certain other exemptions, such as the
deemed cost exemption for property, plant and equipment (PPE), can be adopted?
X Ltd. was using cost model for its property, plant and equipment till March 31, 20X2
under previous GAAP. The Ind AS become applicable to the company for financial year
beginning April 1, 20X2. On April 1, 20X1, i.e., the date of its transition to Ind AS, it used
fair value as the deemed cost in respect of its property, plant and equipment. X Ltd.
wants to follow revaluation model as its accounting policy in respect of its property, plant
and equipment for the first annual Ind AS financial statements.
Whether use of fair values as deemed cost on the date of transition and use of
revaluation model in the first annual Ind AS financial statements would amount to a
change in accounting policy?
Y Ltd. is a first time adopter of Ind AS. The date of transition is April 1, 20X5. On April 1,
20X0, it obtained a 7 year US \$ 1,00,000 loan. It has been exercising the option provided
in Paragraph 46/46A of AS 11 and has been amortising the exchange differences in
respect of this loan over the balance period of such loan. On the date of transition to Ind
AS, Y Ltd. wants to discontinue the accounting policy as per the previous GAAP and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.53
4.
5.
follow the requirements of Ind AS 21 with respect to recognition of foreign exchange
differences.
Whether the Company is permitted to do so?
A company has chosen to elect the deemed cost exemption in accordance with Ind AS
101. However, it does not wish to continue with its existing policy of capitalising exchange
fluctuation on long term foreign currency monetary items to property, plant and equipment
i.e. it does not want to elect the exemption available as per Ind AS 101.
In such a case, how would the company be required to adjust the foreign exchange
fluctuation already capitalised to the cost of property, plant and equipment under previous
GAAP?
XYZ Pvt. Ltd. is a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 following
Accounting Standards notified under Companies (Accounting Standards) Rules, 2006.
The Company has decided to voluntarily adopt Ind AS w.e.f 1st April, 20X2 with a
transition date of 1st April, 20X1.
The Company has one Wholly Owned Subsidiary and one Joint Venture which are into
manufacturing of automobile spare parts.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company under Indian GAAP are as under:
Consolidated Financial Statements
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.54
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Additional Information:
The Company has entered into a joint arrangement by acquiring 50% of the equity shares
of ABC Pvt. Ltd. Presently, the same has been accounted as per the proportionate
consolidated method. The proportionate share of assets and liabilities of ABC Pvt. Ltd.
included in the consolidated financial statement of XYZ Pvt. Ltd. is as under:
The Investment is in the nature of Joint Venture as per Ind AS 111.
Suggest the accounting adjustments which are required to be made in the opening
Balance Sheet as on 1st April, 20X1.
6. Mathur India Private Limited has to present its first financials under Ind AS for the year
ended 31st March, 20X3. The transition date is 1st April, 20X1.
The following adjustments were made upon transition to Ind AS:
(a)
The Company opted to fair value its land as on the date on transition.
The fair value of the land as on 1st April, 20X1 was
amount as on 1st April, 20X1 under the existing GAAP was
10 crores. The carrying
4.5 crores.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.55
(b)
The Company has recognised a provision for proposed dividend of 60 lacs and
related dividend distribution tax of 18 lacs during the year ended 31st March,
20X1. It was written back as on opening balance sheet date.
(c)
The Company fair values its investments in equity shares on the date of transition.
The increase on account of fair valuation of shares is  75 lacs.
(d)
The Company has an Equity Share Capital of 80 crores and Redeemable
Preference Share Capital of 25 crores.
(e)
The reserves and surplus as on 1st April, 20X1 before transition to Ind AS was
 95 crores representing 40 crores of general reserve and 5 crores of capital
reserve acquired out of business combination and balance is surplus in the
Retained Earnings.
(f)
The company identified that the preference shares were in nature of financial
liabilities.
What is the balance of total equity (Equity and other equity) as on 1st April, 20X1 after
transition to Ind AS? Show reconciliation between total equity as per AS (Accounting
Standards) and as per Ind AS to be presented in the opening balance sheet as on 1st
April, 20X1.
Ignore deferred tax impact.
Answers
1.
Ind-AS 101 prescribes that an entity may elect to use one or more of the exemptions of
the Standard. As such, an entity may choose to adopt a combination of optional
exemptions in relation to the underlying account balances.
When the past business combinations after a particular date (30 June 20X0 in the given
case) are restated, it requires retrospective adjustments to the carrying amounts of
acquiree's assets and liabilities on account of initial acquisition accounting of the
acquiree's net assets, the effects of subsequent measurement of those net assets
(including amortisation of non-current assets that were recognised at its fair value),
goodwill on consolidation and the consolidation adjustments. Therefore, the goodwill and
equity (including non-controlling interest (NCI)) cannot be computed by considering the
deemed cost exemption for PPE. However, the entity may adopt the deemed cost
exemption for its property, plant and equipment other than those acquired through
business combinations.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.56
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2. In the instant case, X Ltd. is using revaluation model for property, plant and equipment for
the first annual Ind AS financial statements and using fair value of property, plant and
equipment on the date of the transition, as deemed cost. Since the entity is using fair
value at the transition date as well as in the first Ind AS financial statements, there is no
change in accounting policy and mere use of the term 'deemed cost' would not mean that
there is a change in accounting policy.
3.
4.
5.
Ind AS 101 provides that a first-time adopter may continue the policy adopted for
accounting for exchange differences arising from translation of long-term foreign currency
monetary items recognised in the financial statements for the period ending immediately
before the beginning of the first Ind AS financial reporting period as per the previous
GAAP. Ind AS 101 gives an option to continue the existing accounting policy. Hence,
Y Ltd. may opt for discontinuation of accounting policy as per previous GAAP and follow
the requirements of Ind AS 21. The cumulative amount lying in the Foreign Currency
Monetary Item Translation Difference Account (FCMITDA) as per AS 11 should be
derecognised by an adjustment against retained earnings on the date of transition.
Ind AS 101 permits to continue with the carrying value for all of its property, plant and
equipment as per the previous GAAP and use that as deemed cost for the purposes of
first time adoption of Ind AS. Accordingly, the carrying value of property, plant and
equipment as per previous GAAP as at the date of transition need not be adjusted for the
exchange fluctuations capitalized to property, plant and equipment. Separately, it allows
a company to continue with its existing policy for accounting for exchange differences
arising from translation of long term foreign currency monetary items recognised in the
financial statements for the period ending immediately before the beginning of the first Ind
AS financial reporting period as per the previous GAAP. Accordingly, given that Ind AS
101 provides these two choices independent of each other, it may be possible for an
entity to choose the deemed cost exemption for all of its property, plant and equipment
and not elect the exemption of continuing the previous GAAP policy of capitalising
exchange fluctuation to property, plant and equipment. In such a case, in the given case,
a harmonious interpretation of the two exemptions would require the company to
recognise the property, plant and equipment at the transition date at the previous GAAP
carrying value (without any adjustment for the exchanges differences capitalized under
previous GAAP) but for the purposes of the first (and all subsequent) Ind AS financial
statements, foreign exchange fluctuation on all long term foreign currency borrowings that
arose after the transition date would be recognised in the statement of profit and loss.
As per paras D31AA and D31AB of Ind AS 101, when changing from proportionate
consolidation to the equity method, an entity shall recognise its investment in the joint
venture at transition date to Ind AS.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
14.57
That initial investment shall be measured as the aggregate of the carrying amounts of the
assets and liabilities that the entity had previously proportionately consolidated, including
any goodwill arising from acquisition. If the goodwill previously belonged to a larger cash-
generating unit, or to a group of cash-generating units, the entity shall allocate goodwill to
the joint venture on the basis of the relative carrying amounts of the joint venture and the
cash-generating unit or group of cash-generating units to which it belonged. The balance
of the investment in joint venture at the date of transition to Ind AS, determined in
accordance with paragraph D31AA above is regarded as the deemed cost of the
investment at initial recognition.
Accordingly, the deemed cost of the investment will be
Calculation of proportionate goodwill share of Joint Venture ie ABC Pvt. Ltd.
Note: Only those assets and liabilities have been taken into account for calculation of
'proportionate goodwill share of Joint Venture', which were given in the question as
'proportionate share of assts and liabilities of ABC Ltd. added to XYZ Ltd.'
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.58
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Proportionate Goodwill of Joint Venture
= [(Goodwill on consolidation of subsidiary and JV/Total relative net asset) x Net asset
of JV]
= (1507 / 23,137) x 1825 = 119 (approx.)
Accordingly, the proportional share of assets and liabilities of Joint Venture will be removed
from the respective values assets and liabilities appearing in the balance sheet on
31.3.20X1 and Investment in JV will appear under non-current asset in the transition date
balance sheet as on 1.4.20X1.
Adjustments made in previous GAAP balance sheet to arrive at Transition date Ind AS
Balance Sheet
Transition Date Ind AS Balance Sheet of XYZ Pvt. Ltd. as at 1st April, 20X1
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 101
6.
14.59
Computation of balance total equity as on 1st April, 20X1 after transition to Ind AS
Reconciliation between Total Equity as per AS and Ind AS to be presented in the
opening balance sheet as on 1st April, 20X1
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
14.60
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
