10.60
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT 3 :
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102 :
SHARE-BASED PAYMENT
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you would be able to:
Examine the transactions as share-based payment transactions
Study the various types of share-based payments
Recognize and measure the share-based payment transactions in the
books
Deal with the accounting issues in case of various vesting conditions
attached with the share-based payment transactions
Determine the fair value of share-based payment transactions
Identify the accounting treatment for modification, cancellation and
settlements of such transactions
Make necessary and significant disclosures with respect to share-
based payment transactions in the financial statements.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
UNIT OVERVIEW
10.61
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
Recognition
Types of share-based
payment transactions
Share-Based Payment
Share-based payment
transactions among
group entities
Equity settled share-
based payment
transaction
Cash settled share-based
payment transaction
Disclosure
Share-based payment
transaction with cash
alternative
Transactions in which services are received
Transactions measured by reference to the
fair value of the equity instruments granted
Modifications
including
cancellations and settlements
Share-based payment
transactions
provide
which
the
counterparty with a
choice of settlement
Share-based payment
transactions
which
provide the entity with a
choice of settlement
Determining the fair
value of equity
instruments granted
Treatment of a
reload feature
Treatment of
conditions
If the fair value of the equity instruments
cannot be estimated reliably
Vesting
Non-vesting
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.62
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.1 INTRODUCTION
ESOP
Rs
As the name suggests, it is a payment based on price or
value of shares. Entities often grant shares or share
options to employees or other parties. Share plans and
share option plans are a common feature of employee
remuneration, for directors, senior executives and many
other employees. Some entities issue shares or share
options to pay suppliers, such as suppliers of professional
services.
In India, accounting of share-based payment transactions is
done in accordance with SEBI guidelines and Guidance Note on Accounting for Employee
Share-Based Payments or on the basis of Ind AS 102 "Share-Based Payment". The corporate
entities following Ind AS would not account for share-based payment based on Guidance Note.
The Companies Act, 2013 also discusses about it under section 62.
Under Section 62 (1) (b) of the Companies Act 2013, where at any time a company having a
share capital proposes to increase its subscribed capital by the issue of further shares, such
shares may be offered to employees under a scheme of employees' stock option, subject to a
special resolution passed by the company and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
3.2 DEFINITION
Some of the terms used in Ind AS 102 are as follows:
a.
b.
Cash-settled share-based payment transaction: A share-based payment transaction in
which the entity acquires goods or services by incurring a liability to transfer cash or other
assets to the supplier of those goods or services for amounts that are based on the price
(or value) of equity instruments (including shares or share options) of the entity or
another group entity.
Employees and others providing similar services: Individuals who render personal
services to the entity and either (a) the individuals are regarded as employees for legal or
tax purposes, (b) the individuals work for the entity under its direction in the same way as
individuals who are regarded as employees for legal or tax purposes, or (c) the services
rendered are similar to those rendered by employees. For example, the term
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.63
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
C.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
encompasses all management personnel, i.e. those people having authority and
responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the activities of the entity, including
non-executive directors.
Equity instrument: A contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity
after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instrument granted: The right (conditional or unconditional) to an equity
instrument of the entity conferred by the entity on another party, under a share-based
payment arrangement.
Equity-settled share-based payment transaction: A share-based payment transaction
in which the entity
(a)
(b)
receives goods or services as consideration for its own equity instruments
(including shares or share options), or
receives goods or services but has no obligation to settle the transaction with the
supplier.
Fair value: The amount for which an asset could be exchanged, a liability settled, or an
equity instrument granted could be exchanged, between knowledgeable, willing parties in
an arm's length transaction.
Grant date: The date at which the entity and another party (including an employee)
agree to a share-based payment arrangement, being when the entity and the
counterparty have a shared understanding of the terms and conditions of the
arrangement. At the grant date the entity confers on the counterparty the right to cash,
other assets, or equity instruments of the entity, provided the specified vesting conditions,
if any, are met. If that agreement is subject to an approval process (for example, by
shareholders), grant date is the date when that approval is obtained.
Intrinsic value: The difference between the fair value of the shares to which the
counterparty has the (conditional or unconditional) right to subscribe or which it has the
right to receive, and the price (if any) the counterparty is (or will be) required to pay for
those shares. For example, a share option with an exercise price of 15, on a share with
a fair value of 20, has an intrinsic value of 5.
Market condition: A condition upon which the exercise price, vesting or exercisability of
an equity instrument depends that is related to the market price of the entity's equity
instruments, such as attaining a specified share price or a specified amount of intrinsic
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.64
FINANCIAL REPORTING
j.
k.
value of a share option, or achieving a specified target that is based on the market price
of the entity's equity instruments relative to an index of market prices of equity
instruments of other entities.
Measurement date: The date at which the fair value of the equity instruments granted is
measured for the purposes of this Ind AS. For transactions with employees and others
providing similar services, the measurement date is grant date. For transactions with
parties other than employees (and those providing similar services), the measurement
date is the date the entity obtains the goods or the counterparty renders service.
Performance condition: A vesting condition that requires:
(a)
(b)
the counterparty to complete a specified period of service (ie a service condition);
the service requirement can be explicit or implicit; and
specified performance target(s) to be met while the counterparty is rendering the
service required in (a).
The period of achieving the performance target(s):
(a)
shall not extend beyond the end of the service period; and
1.
(b)
may start before the service period on the condition that the commencement date
of the performance target is not substantially before the commencement of the
service period.
A performance target is defined by reference to:
(a)
(b)
the entity's own operations (or activities) or the operations or activities of another
entity in the same group (i.e. a non-market condition); or
the price (or value) of the entity's equity instruments or the equity instruments of
another entity in the same group (including shares and share options) (ie a market
condition).
A performance target might relate either to the performance of the entity as a whole or to
some part of the entity (or part of the group), such as a division or an individual
employee.
Reload feature: A feature that provides for an automatic grant of additional share options
whenever the option holder exercises previously granted options using the entity's
shares, rather than cash, to satisfy the exercise price.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.65
m.
n.
0.
p.
q.
Reload option: A new share option granted when a share is used to satisfy the exercise
price of a previous share option.
Service condition: A vesting condition that requires the counterparty to complete a
specified period of service during which services are provided to the entity. If the
counterparty, regardless of the reason, ceases to provide service during the vesting
period, it has failed to satisfy the condition. A service condition does not require a
performance target to be met.
Share option: A contract that gives the holder the right, but not the obligation, to
subscribe to the entity's shares at a fixed or determinable price for a specified period of
time.
Vest: To become an entitlement. Under a share-based payment arrangement, a
counterparty's right to receive cash, other assets or equity instruments of the entity vests
when the counterparty's entitlement is no longer conditional on the satisfaction of any
vesting conditions.
Vesting condition: A condition that determines whether the entity receives the services
that entitle the counterparty to receive cash, other assets or equity instruments of the
entity, under a share-based payment arrangement. A vesting condition is either a service
condition or a performance condition.
r. Vesting period: The period during which all the specified vesting conditions of a share-
based payment arrangement are to be satisfied.
3.2.1 Share-based payment arrangement
It is an agreement between the entity (or another group entity or any shareholder of any group
entity) and another party (including an employee) that entitles the other party to receive -
(a)
(b)
cash or other assets of the entity for amounts that are based on the price (or value) of
equity instruments (including shares or share options) of the entity or another group
entity, Or
equity instruments (including shares or share options) of the entity or another group
entity,
provided the specified vesting conditions, if any, are met.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.66
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.2.2 Share-Based Payment Transaction
It is a transaction in which the entity -
(a)
(b)
receives goods or services from the supplier of those goods or services (including an
employee) in a share-based payment arrangement, or
incurs an obligation to settle the transaction with the supplier in a share-based payment
arrangement when another group entity receives those goods or services.
Analysis of share-based payment (SBP)
1.
2.
Share-based payment should be formed with an agreement between an entity & a party
(includes employees) which essentially means that a communication of the terms and
conditions should be in place in order to have share-based payment.
Example 1
A management committee of an entity has initiated a plan to provide some stock options
to its employees but there are some terms which are yet to be finalized and the plan is
not yet communicated to the employee. Since, there is no formal communication stating
the terms or conditions of the agreement, it will not attract Ind AS 102 provisions. The
standard will be attracted when there will be a binding arrangement.
Share-based payments should be made for goods/ services and should be with an
external person e.g. supplier including employee.
Examples 2 & 3
2.
3.
Goods/services have been received by an entity for which it has issued its own
equity shares to the counterparty (who has supplied the goods) at discount/
premium. The value of the goods received has been paid by using its own equity
shares but if the fair value of the goods received are more / less than the value of
share issued by an entity, then some un-identified goods / services will be received
/ or have been received. Hence, Ind AS 102 will still be applicable for such
unidentified goods/ services.
An entity issuing its own shares to a charity without any consideration will be
covered under Ind AS 102. This is a share-based payment arrangement, covered
under Ind AS 102 (not a share-based payment transaction).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.67
3.
4.
5.
6.
Goods/services that are being received by an entity should be from a supplier which will
include an employee of the entity. The goods/services received from a counterparty who
act in the capacity of shareholder will not be covered under Ind AS 102.
Example 4
Service Maintenance Agreement has been entered by an entity with one of the supplier,
outside the entity which requires to pay for these services by issuing equity shares of the
entity. Such an agreement will be covered under Ind AS 102.
A transaction with an employee (or other party) in his/her capacity as a holder of equity
instruments of the entity is not a share-based payment transaction.
Example 5
An entity issued right shares to all its shareholders which include employees of the
company. Since the employees who have received such shares are acting in the capacity
of shareholders and not as employees, this transaction will not be covered under
Ind AS 102.
For receiving goods / services, an entity needs to settle the transaction either by issuing
its own equity shares / or group entity's shares (which is called as "equity settled") or by
paying cash amount equivalent against such shares (which is called as "cash settled") or
a combination of these two where settlement option rests either with an entity or with the
counterparty.
Equity instruments, which means a residual interest in asset & liability of the company will
include -
(a)
Ordinary shares
(b)
Redeemable preference shares
(c)
Written call option or warrants over such ordinary shares.
7.
Share-based payment transaction may be settled by an entity through its own equity
shares or one of group's entity shares which means that a parent of the reporting entity
might issue shares on behalf of its subsidiary for providing goods/services to its
subsidiary and the same transaction will be covered under Ind AS 102.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.68
FINANCIAL REPORTING
8.
Example 6
1.
2.
A parent issues share options to the employee of its subsidiary company or a
subsidiary company issues share options to its employees based on the price of
equity shares of its parent company or the subsidiary company respectively. Both
the plans will be covered under Ind AS 102.
An entity issues certain benefits to its employees by taking a reference of earnings
of next year. Since the benefit is not based on share price of the entity, hence this
transaction will not be covered under Ind AS 102. However, it may be treated as
employee benefits under Ind AS 19.
Vesting conditions means the criteria which is to be fulfilled (if it is required as per the
share-based agreement) in order to get such Shared based payment.
Example 7
A stock option has been issued by an entity to its employees those who remain in service
for next 4 years. Those who leave before 4 years will not get the share-based payments.
Staying with the organization for 4 years is a vesting condition in order to get the shared
based payment.
3.3 SCOPE
3.3.1 What is covered within Ind AS 102?
Based on the analysis of the definitions, the scope of the standard are as follows:
•
• Covers settlement in equity or in cash or alternative
settlement option i.e. to issue shares or by paying cash.
Even if an entity is not able to identify all goods/
services that are being received by settling the
transaction, either by issuing its own equity / group's
equity or by paying a cash value equivalent to the
equity prices, still it will be covered under Ind AS 102.
Un-identified goods/ services that are being received
will be covered in the standard.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.69
•
•
Share-based payment can be settled by another group entity or by using equity shares of
group's entity.
Employee of a company, working as a service provider to an entity and receiving share-
based payments (e.g. stock options, warrants etc.) will be covered under this standard.
• Goods will include inventories, consumables, property, plant & equipment and other non-
financial items.
Examples 8 - 11
8.
9.
An entity grants 10 shares to its employees who will remain in service for next 2 years
this will be covered within the standard as equity settled share-based payment.
An entity grants 1,000 to each employee which is same as the current equity price.
This will not be covered under Ind AS 102 as the amount of 1,000 is fixed now and it
will be paid to the employees even if the market rate of its share goes up/down from the
current level.
10. An entity received services from a party who is acting as shareholder will not be covered
under the standard. However, an employee who received additional payment from the
entity for providing services other than its normal employment will be covered under this
standard.
11. An entity has agreed to provide bonus to its employees purely based on the share price
of the entity. Since the benefit is with reference to the share price of the entity, hence it
will be covered under Ind AS 102.
3.3.2 What is not covered in Ind AS 102?
Transactions with shareholders as a whole, i.e., when the shareholders act solely in their
capacity as shareholders.
Example 12
If an entity grants all holders of a particular class of its equity instruments the right to acquire
additional equity instruments of the entity at a price that is less than the fair value of those
equity instruments, and an employee receives such a right because he/she is a holder of equity
instruments of that particular class, the granting or exercise of that right is not subject to the
requirements of Ind AS 102.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.70
FINANCIAL REPORTING
•
•
Entity shall not apply this standard to transactions in which the entity acquires goods as
part of net assets acquired in business combinations as defined by Ind AS 103 'Business
Combinations', or contribution for Joint ventures as per Ind AS 111 'Joint Arrangements'.
Examples 13 and 14
13. An entity has issued equity instruments in exchange for control of the acquiree is
not within the scope of this standard. However, if the equity instruments are being
issued to acquiree's employees in their capacity as employee, then it will be
covered under Ind AS 102.
14.
An entity buys a business from an individual to whom equity instruments are being
issued. The individual will be working as an employee in the combined new entity.
The instruments that are being issued as part of business purchase consideration
under Ind AS 103 'Business Combination' will not be covered under Ind AS 102.
However, if the equity instrument is being issued in the capacity of accepting
employment in a new company, then it will be covered within Ind AS 102.
Financial instruments issued to buy/sell non-financial items which can be settled at net
will be outside Ind AS 102.
Example 15
Contracts for purchase and sale of goods/ services which are entered for settling in net
amounts/ or keep it for speculation purposes will be covered under Ind AS 109- Financial
Instruments and hence will not be covered under Ind AS 102.
3.4 RECOGNITION
An entity shall recognise the goods or services received or
acquired in a share-based payment transaction when it
obtains the goods or as the services are received. The entity
shall recognise a corresponding increase in equity if the
goods or services were received in an equity-settled share-
based payment transaction, or a liability if the goods or
services were acquired in a cash-settled share-based
payment transaction.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.71
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
Analysis of recognition of SBP (Share-based payments)
• All such goods / services which are being received in share-based payment will be
recognized when such goods are received or services are obtained.
•
•
•
An entity would recognize an expense or an asset if the goods and/or services received
meet the criteria for recognition as an asset.
A corresponding increase in equity for equity settled transactions or in liabilities for cash-
settled transactions would be recognized.
The recognition will depend on vesting conditions, if any (in certain cases there will not be
any vesting condition). It means, if there are certain conditions either service related or
performance related which needs to be completed in order to be eligible for such share-
based payments, then recognition will be based on the best estimate of the expected
vesting value of such share-based payments.
Examples 16 and 17
16. An entity purchases some inventory from a supplier for which the entity will issue
100 shares as payment. The fair value of the inventory was 15,000. On
purchase of inventory, the transaction will be recorded by a debit to the inventory
and a credit to equity with an amount of
15,000 i.e. taking fair value of goods /
services so transacted (except in case of transactions with an employee).
However, if the fair value of goods / services is not reliably measurable, then fair
value of shares can be considered.
17. An entity has given 100 stock options to each of its 1,000 employees for those who
will remain in service for next 4 years. The grant date was 1st January, 20X1. The
condition to remain in service shows that the stock option has been given for the
services to be provided in the next 4 years; hence at the end of each year, the
entity will estimate the expected number of employees who will remain in service
and accordingly will recognize the cost over 4 years.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.72
FINANCIAL REPORTING
• Goods: when received
Timing
•Services: When obtained
Expenses
Recognition (debit entry)
• Asset (if goods/services qualify as asset)
Increase in equity (for equity-settled SBP)
Recognition (credit entry)
• Liability (for cash-settled SBP)
3.5 TYPES OF SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
3.5.1 Equity Settled- Share-Based Payments
Equity
For equity-settled share-based payment transactions, the entity shall
measure the goods or services received, and the corresponding
increase in equity, directly, at the fair value of the goods or services
received, unless that fair value cannot be estimated reliably. If the
entity cannot estimate reliably the fair value of the goods or services
received, the entity shall measure their value, and the corresponding increase in equity,
indirectly, by reference to the fair value of the equity instruments granted.
Analysis of the Equity Settled Share-based payments
• As per Ind AS 102, all goods or services which are received by an entity should be fair
valued in order to arrive at the transaction price to recognize the share-based payment.
•
•
In the absence of reliable information to arrive at the fair value of goods & services
received, the fair value of equity instrument issued will be used.
In the case of EMPLOYEES, it is required by the standard to use fair value of equity
granted because it is practically not possible to identify the fair value of the services
rendered by the employees.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
•
•
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.73
In the case of awards to non-employees, there is a rebuttable presumption that the fair
value of goods/services received from any external supplier can be estimated. However,
if this is not feasible, then an indirect reference can be used by taking fair value of
instruments issued.
There might be some cases where the transaction is other than with employee, where
goods / services received are less than the fair value of equity share issued then some
un-identified goods / services are recognized by taking a difference between fair value of
equity instruments issued and fair value of goods / services received.
Examples 18 and 19
18. An entity has agreed to issue 100 shares to each of its 500 employees if they remain in
service for the next 3 years. In this case 3 years is a service period, on completion of
which shares will be issued by the entity. Since this is a share-based payment plan with
employees of the entity, the fair value of equity instruments issued will be used for
calculating transaction value of the share-based payments.
19. An entity agreed to issue 100 shares to a supplier to provide some consultancy services
for next 2 years. There is a similar contract in the market which has a value of  20,000.
The similar value of the contract will be used as fair value of this share-based payment
transaction unless there is no reliable fair value is available.
Measurement principle for equity-settled awards:
Illustration 1-Equity Settled Shared Based Payment- Service conditions
ABC Limited granted to its employees, share options with a fair value of  5,00,000 on
1st April, 20X0, if they remain in the organization upto 31st March, 20X3. The exercise price if
the share option is NIL. On 31st March, 20X1, ABC Limited expects only 91% of the employees
to remain in the employment. On 31st March, 20X2, company expects only 89% of the
employees to remain in the employment. However, only 82% of the employees remained in the
organization at the end of March, 20X3 and all of them exercised their options. Share options
will be settled in 5,000 shares of 100 each.
Pass the Journal entries?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.74
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.75
3.5.2 Cash Settled- Share-Based Payments
For cash-settled share-based payment transactions, the entity shall measure the goods or
services acquired and the liability incurred at the fair value of the liability. Until the liability is
settled, the entity shall remeasure the fair value of the liability at the end of each reporting
period and at the date of settlement, with any changes in fair value recognized in profit or loss
for the period.
Analysis of the Cash Settled Share-Based Payments
• It is a plan where entity issues rights to its employees/ suppliers where employees/
suppliers will be entitled for a cash payment in future based on equity share prices of the
entity / or equity prices of the Group (group means parent company of the entity). In some
cases, right to increase in equity prices is also provided which is known as Share
Appreciation Rights (SAR).
•
•
The goods/ services received against share-based payment plan to be settled in cash are
measured at fair value of the liability and the liability continues to re-measured at every
reporting date until it is actually paid off.
There could be vesting conditions attached to the share-based payment plans e.g. to
remain in service for next 3 years etc. The recognition of such share-based payment plans
should be done by recognizing fair value of the liability at the time of goods/ services
received and not at the date of grant. The liability so recognized will be fair valued at each
reporting date and difference in fair value will be charged to profit or loss for the period.
• There could be some cases where no vesting period / condition is required to be fulfilled, in
those cases, cash settled share-based payment can be recognized in full at initial
recognition itself.
Examples 20 and 21
20. An entity issued share appreciation rights to its
existing employees who remains in service for
next 3 years and the benefit will then be settled
in cash of an equivalent amount of share price.
21. Management of an entity decides to issue
employees for their past services based on share price of the entity. The
amount equivalent to the shares will be recognized immediately as cost of
employees because there are no conditions which are to be vested upon.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.76
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 2 - Cash Settled Shared-Based Payment - Service conditions
XYZ issued 10,000 Share Appreciation Rights (SARs) that vest immediately to its employees on
1st April, 20X0. The SARs will be settled in cash. Using an option pricing model, at that date it
is estimated that the fair value of a SAR is 95. SAR can be exercised any time upto
31st March, 20X3. At the end of period on 31st March, 20X1 it is expected that 95% of total
employees will exercise the option, 92% of total employees will exercise the option at the end of
next year and finally 89% were exercised at the end of the 3rd year. Fair values at the end of
each period have been given below:
Pass the Journal entries?
Solution
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.77
*****
3.5.3 Share-Based Payment Transactions with Cash Alternatives
For share-based payment transactions in which the terms of the arrangement provide either the
entity or the counterparty with the choice of whether the entity settles the transaction in cash (or
other assets) or by issuing equity instruments, the entity shall account for that transaction, or the
components of that transaction, as a cash settled share-based payment transaction if, and to the
extent that, the entity has incurred a liability to settle in cash or other assets, or as an equity-
settled share-based payment transaction if, and to the extent that, no such liability has been
incurred.
Analysis of Share-Based Payment Transactions with Cash Alternatives
• The choice either to settle in cash or equity may be with the entity or its counterparty
which will define the way of recognizing such alternatives either equity-settled or cash-
settled. The choice to select the cash or equity alternatives can be segregated in two
parts
a) When Counterparty has a choice of settlement
When counterparty has a choice of settlement for such share-based
payments, then this will be treated as compound instrument which has debt
and equity components.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.78
FINANCIAL REPORTING
When such alternatives are given in case of transactions with parties other
than employees where fair value of goods / services is measured directly
then the difference between fair value of such goods/ services and the fair
value of debt component, at the date when the goods or services are
received, will be considered to be the value of equity component.
For other transactions, including transactions with employees, a separate
fair value of compound financial instruments will be calculated and
accordingly the values of goods/services received will be accounted. To
apply this requirement, the entity shall first measure the fair value of the
debt component, and then measure the fair value of the equity component
taking into account that the counterparty must forfeit the right to receive
cash in order to receive the equity instrument. The fair value of the
compound financial instrument is the sum of the fair values of the two
components. However, share-based payment transactions in which the
counterparty has the choice of settlement are often structured so that the
fair value of one settlement alternative is the same as the other. For
example, the counterparty might have the choice of receiving share options
or cash settled share appreciation rights. In such cases, the fair value of the
equity component is zero, and hence the fair value of the compound
financial instrument is the same as the fair value of the debt component.
Conversely, if the fair values of the settlement alternatives differ, the fair
value of the equity component usually will be greater than zero, in which
case the fair value of the compound financial instrument will be greater than
the fair value of the debt component.
The entity shall account separately for the goods or services received or
acquired in respect of each component of the compound financial
instrument. For the debt component, the entity shall recognise the goods or
services acquired, and a liability to pay for those goods or services, as the
counterparty supplies goods or renders service, in accordance with the
requirements applying to cash-settled share-based payment transactions.
For the equity component (if any), the entity shall recognise the goods or
services received, and an increase in equity, as the counterparty supplies
goods or renders service, in accordance with the requirements applying to
equity-settled share-based payment transactions.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.79
At the date of settlement, the entity shall remeasure the liability to its fair
value. If the entity issues equity instruments on settlement rather than
paying cash, the liability shall be transferred direct to equity, as the
consideration for the equity instruments issued.
If the entity pays in cash on settlement rather than issuing equity
instruments, that payment shall be applied to settle the liability in full. Any
equity component previously recognised shall remain within equity. By
electing to receive cash on settlement, the counterparty forfeited the right to
receive equity instruments. However, this requirement does not preclude
the entity from recognising a transfer within equity, i.e. a transfer from one
component of equity to another.
Example 22
An entity issues stock options to its employees which can be claimed either in cash
or equity instrument of an entity. Employees need to be in service for next 2
years. Entity needs to find fair value component of equity to be settled and fair
value of cash amount to be settled. Each balance sheet date, these values need
to be updated. Upon the exercising of the option, if it is in equity then fair value
liability will be transferred to the equity in full.
b) When the entity has a choice of settlement
If the entity can choose the settlement method then the whole award would be
treated as either cash-settled or equity-settled, depending on-
Whether entity has a present obligation to settle in cash in which case
accounting of award would be as a liability. The assumption to consider
present obligation to settle in cash would be in those cases when there is no
commercial substance to issue equity (e.g. restriction to issue new share
capital etc.) or there is past practice or stated policy to settle such type of
arrangement in cash only or entity has generally settled in cash whenever
counterparty asks for cash settlement.
There is no such obligation to pay in cash then equity settled accounting
treatment would be required.
In case, equity settled accounting has been done but the settlement is required to
be done in cash then it would be accounted for as repurchase of an equity interest.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.80
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Upon settlement, if the entity elects the settlement alternative with the higher fair
value, as at the date of settlement, the entity shall recognise an additional expense
for the excess value given, i.e. the difference between the cash paid and the fair
value of the equity instruments that would otherwise have been issued, or the
difference between the fair value of the equity instruments issued and the amount
of cash that would otherwise have been paid, whichever is applicable.
Examples 23 and 24
23. An entity issues stock options to its employees which provide entity an
option to settle either in cash or by entity's own shares. As per the past
practice of the entity, these kind of stock options have been settled in cash
only, hence the entity will create a liability assuming present obligation to
settle the options in cash.
24. An entity has issued certain stock options to its employees where it has
right to settle these options either in cash or by its own equity. Based on
the past practices, the entity assumed the settlement will be done in equity
only and accordingly the fair value of such options at grant date was
credited to equity (based on expected vesting rights). However, the options
were actually settled in cash, hence all such equity portion will be debited to
the extent it was credited as re-purchasing the equity shares, and the
portion above the equity portion so debited will be transferred to Profit and
Loss of the period.
Illustration 3 - Share-based payment with cash alternative
On 1st January, 20X1, ABC limited gives options to its key management personnel (employees)
to take either cash equivalent to 1,000 shares or 1,500 shares. The minimum service
requirement is 2 years and shares being taken must be kept for 3 years.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Solution
10.81
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.82
FINANCIAL REPORTING
*The equity component recognized (40,000) shall remain within equity. By electing to receive
cash on settlement, the employees forfeited the right to receive equity instruments.
*****
Illustration 4-Share-based payment - Purchase of goods
Indian Inc. issued 995 shares in exchange for purchase of an office building. The title was
transferred in the name of Indian Inc. on February, 20X1 and shares were issued. Fair value of
the office building was 2,00,000 and face value of each share of Indian Inc was  100.
Pass the journal entries?
Solution
*****
Illustration 5-Share-based payment - Services
Reliance limited hired a maintenance company for its oil fields. The services will be settled by
issuing 1,000 shares of Reliance. Period for which the service is to be provided is 1st April,
20X1 to 1st July, 20X1 and fair value of the service was estimated using market value of similar
contracts for 1,00,000. Nominal value per share is 10.
Record the transactions in a Journal?
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.83
*****
Illustration 6 - Share-based payment - Cash & equity alternatives
Tata Industries issued share-based option to one of its key management personal which can be
exercised either in cash or equity and it has following features:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.84
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Pass the Journal entries?
Solution
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.85
*****
Example 25-Share-based payment arrangements with cash alternatives
An entity grants an employee the right to choose either 2,000 shares, ie, a right to a cash
payment equal to the value of 2,000 shares, or 2,400 shares. The grant is conditional upon
the completion of three years' service. If the employee chooses the share alternative, the
shares must be held for three years after vesting date.
At the grant date, the entity's share price is 50 per share. At the end of years 1, 2 and 3, the
share price is 52, 55 and 60 respectively. The entity does not expect to pay dividends in
the next three years. After taking into account the effects of the post-vesting transfer
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.86
FINANCIAL REPORTING
restrictions, the entity estimates that the grant date fair value of the share alternative is 48
per share.
At the end of year 3, the employee chooses:
Scenario 1: The cash alternative
Scenario 2: The equity alternative
Application of requirements
The fair value of the equity alternative is
1,15,200 (2,400 shares x 48). The fair value of
the cash alternative is 1,00,000 (2,000 shares x50). Therefore, the fair value of the equity
component of the compound instrument is 15,200 (₹1,15,200 - ₹ 1,00,000).
The entity recognizes the following amounts:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.87
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
3.6 DETERMINING TYPES OF CONDITIONS
Service Conditions
Vesting Conditions
Conditions
Performance Conditions
Non-vesting Conditions
Market related condition
Non-market related condition
3.6.1 Vesting conditions
Share-based payment awards generally vest upon meeting specified conditions, such as service
conditions (time-based) or performance conditions (eg. achieving a specified EBITDA target).
These conditions affect the timing of when the expense is recognized, and in some cases, the
measurement of expense. In addition, if a condition is not met, whether or not the entity may
reverse previously recognized compensation expense depends on the nature of the condition
that was not met. Hence classification of a condition is an important step in accounting of
share-based payments.
Following are the classification of various conditions and their accounting requirements.
a)
Service condition
When share-based payment is dependent upon the minimum term to be served in order
to be eligible for employees share-based payment, it is called service condition.
Examples 26 & 27
26. An entity has issued 100 shares each to its 1,000 employees under share-based
payment if they remain in the organization for next 3 years. This would be
considered to be a service condition; 3 years being the period over which the
employee would be required to be in service as a condition.
27.
If an employee remains in service for at least three years from the grant date of the
award, the employee can exercise the options at any time between three and ten
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.88
FINANCIAL REPORTING
b)
years from the grant date of the award. The fair value of the award at the grant
date, ignoring the effect of vesting condition, is 6,00,000.
For this award, the vesting period is three years, the exercise period is seven
years, and the life of the option is ten years. The requirement to remain employed
is a (vesting) service condition. The entity recognizes an expense of  2,00,000
per year for three years, with a corresponding increase in equity.
If the employee leaves at the end of year two, the entity reverses the cumulative
expense previously recognized. However, if the employee does not exercise
options after the vesting period, expense previously recognized cannot be
reversed.
Consider an alternate scenario. The employee was given an unconditional right to
exercise the option at any time between the grant date and ten years from the
grant date of the award. For this award, the vesting period is nil, the exercise
period and the life of the option are ten years. The entity recognizes an expense
of 6,00,000 immediately, with a corresponding increase in equity. Subsequently,
the entity cannot reverse this expense even if the employee does not exercise its
options. This is because they are vested from day 1.
Performance condition
If an employee is granted share options conditional upon the achievement of a
performance condition and remaining in the entity's employment until that performance
condition is satisfied, and the length of the vesting period varies depending on when that
performance condition is satisfied, the entity shall presume that the services to be
rendered by the employee as consideration for the share options will be received in the
future, over the expected vesting period. The entity shall estimate the length of the
expected vesting period at grant date, based on the most likely outcome of the
performance condition.
Performance condition may be
a. Market-related; or
b.
Non-market related.
a.
Market related condition
In order to be eligible for share-based payment, when one of the conditions is to
achieve target price/ value of the share by an entity, it is called as market-related
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
b.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.89
performance condition. If the performance condition is a market condition, the
estimate of the length of the expected vesting period shall be consistent with the
assumptions used in estimating the fair value of the options granted and shall not
be subsequently revised.
Example 28
An entity issues stock options to its employees who will serve the organization for
next 2 years and till the time the share price reaches to 100. The target price to
reach 100 is one of the market-related condition.
Non-market related condition
When the parameter is not market driven but linked with some internal
performance/ operations or activities of the entity, it will be considered as non-
market related conditions. Non- market related conditions do not have any impact
on market price of the shares of the entity issuing such share-based payments. If
the performance condition is not a market condition, the entity shall revise its
estimate of the length of the vesting period, if necessary, if subsequent information
indicates that the length of the vesting period differs from previous estimates.
Example 29
An entity issued some stock options to employees with a condition that they have
to remain in the organisation for next 2 years and EBITA of the entity should rise to
 10 million. Here, the EBITA target is non-market related condition.
3.6.2 Non-vesting conditions
Such conditions which do not have any impact on eligibility to have share-based payments. It
has not been specifically defined by the standard. However, one can understand this as
conditions which are other than vesting conditions.
Examples 30 & 31
30. An entity issued some stock options to its employees wherein they are required to serve
minimum period of next 2 years and from the end of $2^{nd}$ year there will further be waiting
time till next 1 year within which the entity should achieve revenue of 100 million.
However, if an employee leaves the entity after the end of $2^{nd}$ year then the employee will
not lose the entitlement to get such share-based payments. Hence the condition of
achieving revenue target is non-vesting condition.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.90
FINANCIAL REPORTING
31. An entity grants share options to a director on the condition that the director does not
compete with the reporting entity for a period of at least three years. The fair value of the
award at the date of the grant, including the effect of non - compete clause is 15 million.
The 'non-compete' clause is a non-vesting condition because the entity does not receive
any services. On the grant date, the entity immediately recognizes a cost of 15 million
because director is not providing any future services. The entity cannot reverse the
expense recognised, even if the director goes to work for a competitor and loses the
share options.
3.7 DETERMINING IMPACT OF CONDITIONS ON SHARE
BASED VALUATION
Once we understood the conditions attached with any share-based payment, next question
arises that about the implication of the conditions on accounting / measurement of such share-
based payments and why it is crucial to segregate them.
a. A grant of equity instruments might be conditional upon satisfying specified vesting
conditions. For example, a grant of shares or share options to an employee is typically
conditional on the employee remaining in the entity's employment for a specified period of
time. There might be performance conditions that must be satisfied, such as the entity
achieving a specified growth in profit or a specified increase in the entity's share price.
Vesting conditions, other than market conditions, shall not be taken into account when
estimating the fair value of the shares or share options at the measurement date. Instead,
vesting conditions shall be taken into account by adjusting the number of equity
instruments included in the measurement of the transaction amount so that, ultimately,
the amount recognised for goods or services received as consideration for the equity
instruments granted shall be based on the number of equity instruments that eventually
vest. Hence, on a cumulative basis, no amount is recognised for goods or services
received if the equity instruments granted do not vest because of failure to satisfy a
vesting condition, eg the counterparty fails to complete a specified service period, or a
performance condition is not satisfied, subject to the requirements mentioned below in
point c.
b.
To apply the requirements mentioned in abovementioned point (a), the entity shall
recognise an amount for the goods or services received during the vesting period based
on the best available estimate of the number of equity instruments expected to vest and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.91
C.
d.
shall revise that estimate, if necessary, if subsequent information indicates that the
number of equity instruments expected to vest differs from previous estimates. On
vesting date, the entity shall revise the estimate to equal the number of equity
instruments that ultimately vested, subject to the requirements mentioned below in
point c.
Market conditions, such as a target share price upon which vesting (or exercisability) is
conditioned, shall be taken into account when estimating the fair value of the equity
instruments granted. Therefore, for grants of equity instruments with market conditions,
the entity shall recognize the goods or services received from a counterparty who
satisfies all other vesting conditions (eg services received from an employee who remains
in service for the specified period of service), irrespective of whether that market
condition is satisfied.
Similarly, an entity shall take into account all non-vesting conditions when estimating the
fair value of the equity instruments granted. Therefore, for grants of equity instruments
with non-vesting conditions, the entity shall recognise the goods or services received
from a counterparty that satisfies all vesting conditions that are not market conditions (eg
services received from an employee who remains in service for the specified period of
service), irrespective of whether those non-vesting conditions are satisfied.,
Treatment of a reload feature
For options with a reload feature, the reload feature shall not be taken into account when
estimating the fair value of options granted at the measurement date. Instead, a reload option
shall be accounted for as a new option grant, if and when a reload option is subsequently
granted.
Below mentioned table summarizes the impact of various conditions
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.92
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Note 1 Share-based payment will be measured at fair value on initial recognition which will
include the effect of these conditions. Equity settled share-based payment will be measured at
fair value on grant date with no subsequent measurement, whereas cash settled share-based
payment shall be re-measured at each reporting date till its settlement in full.
Note 2 These conditions will have no impact on fair valuation of share-based payments.
However, they will be considered while estimating the expected number of equity shares at the
end of each period for recognition of the share-based payment.
Summary of recognising expense for an award with multiple conditions:
Example 32
An entity issued 100 shares each to its 1,000 employees under share-based payment upon the
condition to serve the organization for at least next 2-years subject to the below scenarios:
1) EBIDTA of the entity shall be 10 million in next 2 years.
2)
Share price of the entity shall be 150 in next 2 years.
3)
Employees are required to serve additional 4 months from the end of 2 years but will
have no impact on vesting rights at the end of 2nd year.
Since 2 years to remain in service is a 'service related condition', it will be considered in the
calculation of expected number of shares which will satisfy the conditions attached.
1) EBIDTA is one of the performance conditions which is non-market related, hence will be
considered while making an estimation of number of shares which will satisfy the
condition attached.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.93
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
2)
3)
Share price target is one of the market related conditions and hence it will be considered
in the measurement of fair value at initial recognition (equity & cash settled) and at
subsequent dates (in case of cash settled).
Additional 4-months requirement does not have any impact on eligibility to get share-
based payment. Therefore, it is a non-vesting condition and will be considered in fair
value of the share-based payment.
Illustration 7 - Equity Settled - Non-market conditions
Ankita Holding Inc. grants 100 shares to each of its 500 employees on 1st January, 20X1. The
employees should remain in service during the vesting period. The shares will vest at the end of
the
First year
if the company's earnings increase by 12%;
Second year if the company's earnings increase by more than 20% over the two-year period;
Third year if the entity's earnings increase by more than 22% over the three-year period.
The fair value per share at the grant date is 122. In 20X1, earnings increased by 10%, and 29
employees left the organisation. The company expects that the shares will vest at the end of the
year 20X2. The company also expects that additional 31 employees will leave the organisation
in the year 20X2 and that 440 employees will receive their shares at the end of the year 20X2.
At the end of 20X2, company's earnings increased by 18%. Therefore, the shares did not vest.
Only 29 employees left the organization during 20X2. Company believes that additional 23
employees will leave in 20X3 and earnings will further increase so that the performance target
will be achieved in 20X3. At the end of the year 20X3, only 21 employees have left the
organization. Assume that the company's earnings increased to desired level and the
performance target has been met.
Determine the expense for each year and pass appropriate journal entries?
Solution
Since the earnings of the entity is non-market related, hence it will not be considered in fair
value calculation of the shares given. However, the same will be considered while calculating
number of shares to be vested.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.94
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Workings:
Note 1:
Expense for $20\times1=$
Note 2:
Expense for $20\times2=$
Number of employees x Shares per employee x Fair value of share x
Proportionate vesting period
$=440\times100\times122\times\frac{1}{2}=26,84,000$
(Number of employees x Shares per employee x Fair value of share x
Proportionate vesting period) - Expense recognized in year 20X1
$=(419\times100\times122\times2/3)-26,84,000=7,23,867$
(No of employees x Shares per employee x Fair value of share x
Proportionate vesting period)  Expense recognized in year 20X1 and
20X2
$=(421\times100\times122\times3/3)-(26,84,000+7,23,867)=17,28,333.$
Note 3:
Expense for $20\times3=$
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.95
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
*****
Illustration 8 - Equity Settled - Non market conditions (Reversals)
ACC limited granted 10,000 share options to one of its managers. In order to get the options,
the manager has to work for next 3 years in the organization and reduce the cost of production
by 10% over the next 3 years.
Fair value of the option at grant date was
Cost reduction achieved-
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
How the expenses would be recorded?
Solution
95
12% Achieved
8% Not expected to vest in future
10% Achieved
It is a non-market related condition. Hence the target to achieve cost reduction would be taken
while estimating the number of options to be vested.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.96
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The condition to achieve 10% cost reduction each was not fulfilled in the year 2 and there was
no expectation to vest this non-market condition in future as well and hence earlier expense
amount was reversed in year 2. Since in the year 3 the non-market condition was again met,
hence all such expense will be charged to Profit and Loss.
*****
Illustration 9 - Equity Settled - Market based conditions
Apple Limited has granted 10,000 share options to one of its directors for which he must work
for next 3 years and the price of the share should increase by 20% over next 3 years.
The share price has moved as per below details -
At the grant date, the fair value of the option was 120.
How should we recognize the transaction?
Solution
The share price movement is a market-based vesting condition hence its expectations are taken
into consideration while calculating the fair value of the option.
Even if the required market condition as required is not fulfilled, there is no requirement to
reverse the expense previously booked.
Irrespective of the outcome of the market prices (as it is already taken care of in the fair value of the
option), each period an amount of $(120\times10,000)/3=\overline{\times}4,00,000$ will be charged to profit and loss.
*****
3.8 GRANT DATE
Definition of Grant date
"The date at which the entity and another party (including an employee) agrees to a share-
based payment arrangement, being when the entity and the counterparty have a shared
understanding of the terms and conditions of the arrangement. At grant date the entity confers
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.97
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
on the counterparty the right to cash, other assets, or equity instruments of the entity, provided
the specified vesting conditions, if any, are met. If that agreement is subject to an approval
process (for example, by shareholders), grant date is the date when that approval is obtained".
Analysis of the definition of the Grant date
•
•
•
It is crucial to determine grant date correctly for determination of fair value of share-
based payment and its accounting.
There must be an agreement between the employee/ supplier and the entity with clear
communication of the terms and conditions of such share-based payment. The date of
such agreement will be considered as grant date.
If the agreement is subject to the approval of appropriate authorities, then the grant date
will be the date of approval.
Example 33
Entity initiated a share-based payment agreement in its board meeting and directed the
supervisors to communicate the agreement to the employee. Consider the following
scenarios to arrive at grant date:
1)
2)
3)
Now,
1.
Employees have not yet given his/her consent either implicitly or explicitly.
However, entity has taken approval of the agreement in its General Meeting.
Employees have agreed to the terms implicitly/ explicitly. However, the approval
process is under finalization.
Certain terms have not been specifically mentioned since they are based on some
subjective conditions in future.
2.
3.
Even when the approval has been acquired, no consent has been given by an
employee/ counterparty; therefore, grant date cannot be determined.
Even when the employee/ counterparty has agreed to the terms but approval
process is still not complete, hence the grant date should be the date when
approvals are complete.
Terms/ conditions mentioned in the agreement must be objectively defined and
should not be based on subjective outcome. Mutual understanding is crucial which
essentially means that all terms/ clauses and calculation related to the equity
prices must be clear and objectively defined.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.98
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3.9 SUBSEQUENT MEASUREMENT
3.9.1 Equity settled Share-Based Payment
The entity shall recognise an amount for the goods or services received during the vesting
period based on the best available estimate of the number of equity instruments expected to
vest and shall revise that estimate, if necessary, if subsequent information indicates that the
number of equity instruments expected to vest differs from previous estimates. On vesting date,
the entity shall revise the estimate to equal the number of equity instruments that ultimately
vested.
Equity will be credited by an additional amount (adjusted with re-estimation of expected vesting
equity shares at each reporting period) and there will not be any change in the value credited to
the equity.
Example 34
An entity issued 100 shares each to its 2,000 employees subject to service condition of next
3 years. Grant date fair value of the shares is 200 each. There is an expectation that
employee will remain in service at the rate 95% at end of 1st year, however the expectation got
revised at the end of 2nd year to 92% and again got revised to 88% at the end of the 3rd year.
3.9.2 Cash-settled share-based payment
After the initial recognition of a liability to settle SBP in cash, at the end of each subsequent
period the liability would be fair valued till the time it is settled.
Example 35
An entity issued 100 shares each to its 20 employees subject to service condition of next
3 years. The settlement is to be made in cash. Grant date fair value of the shares is 200
each. However, the fair value as at end of 1st year, 2nd year & 3rd year were 180,  190,  220
respectively.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.99
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
3.10 MODIFICATION, CANCELLATION AND SETTLEMENTS
An entity might modify the terms and conditions on which the equity instruments were granted.
For example, it might reduce the exercise price of options granted to employees (i.e. reprice the
options), which increases the fair value of those options.
Analysis of the requirement of Modification, Cancellation and Settlements
• An entity shall recognize, as a minimum, the services measured at the grant date fair
value unless vesting conditions are not fulfilled. If an entity modifies as award, it must
recognize, at a minimum, cost of the original award as if the award was not modified. If
modification increases fair value of the award, the entity must recognize that additional
cost. The additional cost is spread over the period from the modification date until the
vesting of modified options, which may differ from the vesting date of original award.
Whether a modification increases or decreases the fair value of an award is determined
at the modification date. If an entity modifies a vested option, it recognizes any additional
fair value given on the modification date itself.
• This requirement is applicable irrespective of any modification of terms, cancellation or
early settlement, if any.
•
If a grant of equity instruments is cancelled or settled during the vesting period (other
than a grant cancelled by forfeiture when the vesting conditions are not satisfied):
a. the entity shall account for the cancellation or settlement as an acceleration of
vesting, and shall therefore recognise immediately the amount that otherwise
would have been recognised for services received over the remainder of the
vesting period.
b.
any payment made to the employee on the cancellation or settlement of the grant
shall be accounted for as the repurchase of an equity interest, ie as a deduction
from equity, except to the extent that the payment exceeds the fair value of the
equity instruments granted, measured at the repurchase date. Any such excess
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.100
FINANCIAL REPORTING
•
•
C.
shall be recognised as an expense. However, if the share-based payment
arrangement included liability components, the entity shall remeasure the fair value
of the liability at the date of cancellation or settlement. Any payment made to
settle the liability component shall be accounted for as an extinguishment of the
liability.
if new equity instruments are granted to the employee and on the date when those
new equity instruments are granted, the entity identifies the new equity instruments
granted as replacement equity instruments for the cancelled equity instruments,
the entity shall account for the granting of replacement equity instruments in the
same way as a modification of the original grant of equity instruments, in
accordance with paragraph 27 of Ind AS 102 and the guidance in Appendix B of
Ind AS 102. The incremental fair value granted is the difference between the fair
value of the replacement equity instruments and the net fair value of the cancelled
equity instruments, at the date the replacement equity instruments are granted.
The net fair value of the cancelled equity instruments is their fair value,
immediately before the cancellation, less the amount of any payment made to the
employee on cancellation of the equity instruments that is accounted for as a
deduction from equity in accordance with (b) above. If the entity does not identify
new equity instruments granted as replacement equity instruments for the
cancelled equity instruments, the entity shall account for those new equity
instruments as a new grant of equity instruments.
If an entity or counterparty can choose whether to meet a non-vesting condition, the entity
shall treat the entity's or counterparty's failure to meet that non-vesting condition during
the vesting period as a cancellation.
If an entity repurchases vested equity instruments, the payment made to the employee
shall be accounted for as a deduction from equity, except to the extent that the payment
exceeds the fair value of the equity instruments repurchased, measured at the
repurchase date. Any such excess shall be recognised as an expense.
Illustration 10 - Modifications - Equity-settled share-based payment
Marathon Inc. issued 150 share options to each of its 1,000 employees subject to the service
condition of 3 years. Fair value of the option given was calculated at 129. Below are the
details and activities related to the SBP plan-
Year 1: 35 employees left and further 60 employees are expected to leave
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.101
Share options re-priced (as MV of shares has fallen) as the FV fell to  50.
After the re-pricing they are now worth  80, hence expense is expected to increase by  30.
Year 2: 30 employees left and further 36 employees are expected to leave
Year 3: 39 employees left
How the modification/ re-pricing will be accounted?
Solution
The re-pricing was done at the end of year 1, and hence the increased expense would be
spread over next 2 years equally.
*****
Illustration 11 - Cancellation- Equity Settled Share-based payment
Anara Fertilisers Limited issued 2000 share options to its 10 directors for an exercise price of
100. The directors are required to stay with the company for next 3 years.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.102
FINANCIAL REPORTING
During the year 2, there was a crisis in the company and Management decided to cancel the
scheme immediately. It was estimated further as below-
There was a compensation which was paid to directors and only 9 directors were currently in
employment. At the time of cancellation of such scheme, it was agreed to pay an amount of
95 per option to each of 9 directors.
Suggest how the cancellation will be recorded.
Solution
Working Notes:
1.
Amount to be deducted from Equity
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.103
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
2. Amount transferred to Profit and Loss
*****
3.11 FAIR VALUE CALCULATION
All the share-based payment plans are recognized referring fair value at grant date and it is
crucial to understand how the fair value is arrived and the specific guidance available in the
standard.
Fair value which is required to be used is not just a quoted price of any security. There are
some market related conditions and / or non-vesting conditions that would be considered in the
determination of fair value. Hence to determine such fair value, one has to use valuation
techniques. However, there is nothing specific which has been defined by the standard. Black-
scholes pricing model and Binomial pricing model are being used widely and are also generally
accepted.
Standard specify minimum inputs to be used while calculating the fair value.
All option pricing models take into account, as a minimum, the following factors:
(a)
the exercise price of the option;
(b)
the life of the option;
(c)
the current price of the underlying shares;
(d)
the expected volatility of the share price;
(e)
the dividends expected on the shares (if appropriate); and
(f)
the risk-free interest rate for the life of the option.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.104
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Exercise price, current price and life of the option are observable inputs and relatively easy to
understand and value can be easily identified. However, other inputs which are required to be
used as minimum can be detailed out as below:
1.
Expected early exercise: If a share-based payment has service / performance
conditions attached, then there is an underlying presumption that the share-based
payment plan will vest and it is usually expected to settle / exercise when the current
market price crosses exercise price of the plan. Some senior level employees normally
tend to exercise options later than lower-level employees. Since all expected exercise
will not happen at the same time and it is difficult to establish a linear function for such
behavior, hence Binomial model is generally used in such situations. Alternatively,
expected early exercise could be modelled in a similar option pricing model that uses
contractual life as an input.
2. Expected volatility: Expected volatility is a measure of the amount by which a price is
expected to fluctuate during a period. The measure of volatility used in option pricing
models is the annualised standard deviation of the continuously compounded rates of
return on the share over a period of time. Volatility is typically expressed in annualised
terms that are comparable regardless of the time period used in the calculation, for
example, daily, weekly or monthly price observations.
3. Expected dividend: Whether expected dividend should be taken into account when
measuring the fair value of shares or options granted depends on whether the
counterparty is entitled to dividend or dividend equivalents.
Example 36
If employees were granted options and are entitled to dividend on the underlying shares
or dividend equivalents (which might be paid in cash or applied to reduce the exercise
price) between grant date and exercise date, the options granted should be valued as if
no dividend will be paid on the underlying shares, i.e. the input for expected dividend
should be zero.
4. Risk-free interest rate: The risk-free interest rate is the implied yield currently available
on zero-coupon government issues of the country in whose currency the exercise price is
expressed, with a remaining term equal to the expected term of the option being valued
(based on the option's remaining contractual life and taking into account the effects of
expected early exercise). It may be necessary to use an appropriate substitute, if no
such government issues exist or circumstances indicate that the implied yield on zero-
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.105
coupon government issues is not representative of the risk-free interest rate (for example,
in high inflation economies). Also, an appropriate substitute should be used if market
participants would typically determine the risk-free interest rate by using that substitute,
rather than the implied yield of zero-coupon government issues, when estimating the fair
value of an option with a life equal to the expected term of the option being valued.
3.12 GROUP SHARE-BASED PAYMENT PLAN
In practice, we have come across many cases where one member of the group (typically, the
parent) has obligation to settle a share-based payment transaction in which services are
provided to another member of the group (typically a subsidiary). For example, within a
multinational group, shares in the listed parent entity may be granted to the employees of
various subsidiary entities located around the world. In some other cases, a listed subsidiary
may have obligation to settle a share-based payment transaction in which services are provided
to another member of the group (including the parent). These transactions are within the scope
of Ind AS 102 for the entity receiving the services. This is despite the fact that it is not a direct
party to the arrangement between its group entity and its employee.
For share-based payment transactions among group entities, in its separate or individual
financial statements, the entity receiving the goods or services shall measure the goods or
services received as either an equity-settled or a cash-settled share-based payment transaction
by assessing:
(a) the nature of the awards granted, and
(b) its own rights and obligations.
The amount recognised by the entity receiving the goods or services may differ from the amount
recognised by the consolidated group or by another group entity settling the share-based
payment transaction.
The entity receiving the goods or services shall measure the goods or services received as an
equity-settled share-based payment transaction when:
(a) the awards granted are its own equity instruments, or
(b) the entity has no obligation to settle the share-based payment transaction.
The entity shall subsequently remeasure such an equity-settled share-based payment
transaction only for changes in non-market vesting conditions. In all other circumstances, the
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.106
FINANCIAL REPORTING
entity receiving the goods or services shall measure the goods or services received as a cash-
settled share-based payment transaction.
The entity settling a share-based payment transaction when another entity in the group receives
the goods or services shall recognise the transaction as an equity-settled share-based payment
transaction only if it is settled in the entity's own equity instruments. Otherwise, the transaction
shall be recognised as a cash-settled share-based payment transaction.
Does counterparty get
my equity instruments?
Yes
No
Equity-settled expenses
Does counterparty get
equity instruments of
another entity in the
same group?
No
Yes
Does counterparty get cash (or other assets)
based on the value of either my equity
instruments or equity instruments of another
group entity?
Do I have to provide those instruments (that
is, am i the settler?)
Yes
Yes
No
Cash-settied expenses
Do I have to settle the
obligation?
Not in the scope of Ind
AS 102
Yes
Cash-settied expenses
No
Equity-settled expenses
No
Equity-settled expenses
Let's understand the basis of determination of the classification of share-based payment
transactions in both separate financial statements and consolidated financial statements in
various scenarios:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.107
1.
2.
Parent issues its own shares for the share-based payment plan issued by its
subsidiary
Since the subsidiary company do not have any obligation to settle the services/ goods
which are being issued against the plan, hence it will be treated as equity-settled share-
based payment (for subsidiary).
Parent would debit these shares as "Investment in Subsidiary" and credit its equity.
Subsidiary will treat this as equity-settled share-based payment plan and will debit
its expenses (employee related cost) and credit the capital contribution from the
Parent.
Subsidiary provides rights to its employees to get equity instruments of its parent
Subsidiary will account for this arrangement as cash-settled share-based payment plan
since it has an obligation to settle the same in other than its own equity shares.
Parent would consider the payment/ settlement which is being made by its
subsidiary as credit to "Dividend Income" and debit to Expenses (employee related
cost).
Subsidiary would debit its retained earnings as "Dividend distribution" and credit
Equity (being share issued).
3.
Parent settles the transaction by paying cash value for share-based payment plan
issued by its subsidiary
Irrespective of the cash which is settled either based on Parent's equity or Subsidiary's
equity, it will be treated as equity-settled share-based payment plan in case of separate
financial statements of subsidiary because the subsidiary does not have any obligation to
settle the payments.
Illustration 12
A parent grants 200 share options to each of 100 employees of its subsidiary, conditional upon
the completion of two years' service with the subsidiary. The fair value of the share options on
grant date is 30 each. At grant date, the subsidiary estimates that 80 percent of the
employees will complete the two-year service period. This estimate does not change during the
vesting period. At the end of the vesting period, 81 employees complete the required two years
of service. The parent does not require the subsidiary to pay for the shares needed to settle the
grant of share options.
Pass the necessary journal entries for giving effect to the above arrangement.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.108
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
As required by paragraph B53 of the Ind AS 102, over the two-year vesting period, the
subsidiary measures the services received from the employees in accordance, the requirements
applicable to equity-settled share-based payment transactions as given in paragraph 43B.
Thus, the subsidiary measures the services received from the employees on the basis of the fair
value of the share options at grant date. An increase in equity is recognised as a contribution
from the parent in the separate or individual financial statements of the subsidiary.
The journal entries recorded by the subsidiary for each of the two years are as follows:
3.13 DISCLOSURE
Standard requires an entity to disclose the following-
• Type and scope of agreement existing during the reporting period.
• Describing general terms & conditions of each type of share-based payment plans.
•
•
•
The number of weighted average price of share option as outstanding with a movement of
granted, vested, expired, exercised, cancelled and closing balance of share-based
payment plans.
The average share price of exercised options.
The range of exercise prices and weighted average remaining contractual life of options
outstanding at the end of reporting period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.109
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
•
The valuation method used to estimate the fair value of the awards.
•
The impact on Statement of Profit and Loss and Balance Sheet for such share-based
payments.
3.14 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Bharti Airtel Limited' for
the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Share-based payment' and its accounting policy
thereon.
25.1 Share-based payment plans
The following table provides an overview of all existing share option plans of the Company:
The stock options vesting are subject to service and certain performance conditions mainly pertaining to certain financial parameters.
The movement in the number of stock options and the related weighted average exercise prices are as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.110
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The details of weighted average remaining contractual life, weighted average fair value and weighted average share price for the
options are as follows:
The fair value of options is measured using Black-Scholes valuation model. The key inputs used in the measurement of the grant
date fair valuation of equity settled plans is given in the table below:
The expected life of the stock options is based on the Company's expectations and is not necessarily indicative of exercise patterns
that may actually occur. The expected volatility reflects the assumption that the historical volatility over a period similar to the
expected life of the options is indicative of future trends, which may not necessarily be the actual outcome. Further, the expected
volatility is based on the weighted average volatility of the comparable benchmark companies.
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Share-based payments
The Company operates equity-settled and cash-settled employee share-based compensation
plans, under which the Company receives services from employees as consideration for stock
options either towards shares of the Company or cash settled units.
In case of equity-settled awards, the fair value of stock options (at grant date) is recognised as an
expense in the Statement of Profit and Loss within employee benefits as employee share-based
payment expenses over the vesting period, with a corresponding increase in share-based payment
reserve (a component of equity).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.111
However, in case of cash-settled awards, the credit is recognised as a liability within other non-
financial liabilities over the vesting period. Subsequently, at each reporting period, until the liability
is settled, and at the date of settlement, liability is re-measured at fair value through Statement of
Profit and Loss.
The total amount so expensed is determined by reference to the grant date fair value of the stock
options granted, which includes the impact of any market performance conditions and non-vesting
conditions but excludes the impact of any service and non-market performance vesting conditions.
However, the non-market performance vesting and service conditions are considered in the
assumption as to the number of options that are expected to vest. The forfeitures are estimated at
the time of grant and reduce the said expense rateably over the vesting period.
The expense so determined is recognised over the requisite vesting period, which is the period
over which all of the specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied. As at each reporting date, the
Company revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest, if required.
It recognises the impact of any revision to original estimates in the period of change. Accordingly,
no expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest, except for which vesting is
conditional upon a market performance / non-vesting condition. These are treated as vested
irrespective of whether or not the market / non-vesting condition is satisfied, provided that service
conditions and all other non-market performance are satisfied.
Where the terms of an award are modified, in addition to the expense pertaining to the original
award, an incremental expense is recognised for any modification that results in additional fair
value or is otherwise beneficial to the employee as measured at the date of modification.
Where an equity-settled award is cancelled (including due to non-vesting conditions not being
met), it is treated as if it is vested thereon, and any un-recognised expense for the award is
recognised immediately. In case of cancellation of cash-settled award, change in the value of the
liability, if any, is recognised in Statement of Profit and Loss.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 – Bharti Airtel Limited)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
10.112
FINANCIAL REPORTING
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1. An entity issued 100 shares each to its 1,000 employees subject to service condition of
next 2 years. Grant date fair value of the share is 195 each. There is an expectation
97% of the employees will remain in service at the end of 1st year. However, at the end
of 2nd year the expected employees to remain in service would be 91% of the total
employees. Calculate the expense for years 1 & 2?
2.
3.
An entity issued 50 shares each to its 170 employees subject to service condition of next
2 years. The settlement is to be made in cash. Grant date fair value of the share is 85
each, however, the fair value as at end of 1st year, 2nd year were  80 & ₹90
respectively. Calculate the expense for years 1 and 2
Company P is a holding company for company B. A group share-based payment is being
organized in which Parent issues its own equity-shares for the employees of company B.
The details are as below
Pass the journal entry in the books of company P & company B?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.
10.113
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
An entity P issues share-based payment plan to its employees based on the below
details:
5.
6.
Define expenses related to such share-based payment plan in each year subject to the
below scenarios-
a) Market condition if fulfilled in year 3, or
b) Market condition is fulfilled in year 5.
Entity X grants 10 shares each to its 1,000 employees on the conditions as mentioned
below-
To remain in service & entity's profit after tax (PAT) shall reach to 100 million.
It is expected that PAT should reach to 100 million by the end of 3 years.
Fair value at grant date is 100.
Employees expected for vesting right by 1st year 97%, then it revises to 95% by
2nd year and finally to 93% by 3rd year.
Calculate the expenses for next 3 years in respect of share-based payment?
At 1st January, 20X0, Ambani Limited grants its CEO an option to take either cash amount
equivalent to 800 shares or 990 shares. The minimum service requirement is 2 years.
There is a condition to keep the shares for 3 years if shares are opted.
The key management personnel exercises his cash option at the end of 20X2.
Pass the journal entries.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
7.
10.114
FINANCIAL REPORTING
MINDA issued 11,000 share appreciation rights (SARs) that vest immediately to its
employees on 1st April, 20X0. The SARs will be settled in cash. Using an option pricing
model, at that date it is estimated that the fair value of a SAR is 100. SAR can be
exercised any time until 31st March, 20X3. It is expected that out of the total employees,
94% at the end of the period on 31st March, 20X1, 91% at the end of next year will
exercise the option. Finally, when these were vested i.e. at the end of the 3rd year, only
85% of the total employees exercised the option.
Pass the Journal entries?
Answers
1.
2.
Liability will be re-measured at each reporting date.
Fair value at the end of the year will be used.
3.
Books of Company P
Investment in Company B
Dr.  2,17,500
To Equity Capital / Securities Premium (Issue of Shares) ₹2,17,500
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Books of Company B
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.115
Expense
Dr.
2,17,500
To Capital contribution from Parent P
2,17,500
4.
Market conditions are required to be considered while calculating fair value at the grant
date. However, service conditions will be considered as per the expected vesting right to
be exercised by the employees and would be re-estimated during vesting period.
However, if the market-related condition is fulfilled before it is expected then all remaining
expenses would immediately be charged off. If market-related condition takes longer
than the expected period, then original expected period will be followed.
a) Market condition is fulfilled in year 3:
b) Market condition is fulfilled in year 5:
5.
Entity's PAT is one of the non-market related conditions and hence would be included
while making an expectation of vesting shares and there is no requirement to make any
changes in the non-market condition whether this is fulfilled or not because it has already
been considered in the expectation of vesting rights at the end of each year.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
6.
10.116
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 102
10.117
7.
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
