INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.313
UNIT 7 :
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
☐
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105: NON-CURRENT
ASSETS HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED
OPERATIONS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you will be able to
List out the objective and scope of the standard
Define the terms non-current asset, disposal group, cash generating unit
and discontinued operations
Examine the criteria for classifying non-current assets (or disposal group)
as held for sale
Measure non-current assets (or disposal group) classified as held for sale
Present and disclose non-current assets (or disposal group) classified as
held for sale
Present and disclose discontinued operations as per the standard.
Elaborate significant differences between Ind AS 105 and AS 24
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.314
UNIT OVERVIEW
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Presentation and Disclosure of
Discontinued Operations
Presentation and Disclosure of
non-current assets (disposal
group) held for sale
Objective
Accounting for assets held for
sale
Presentation and disclosure of
asset held for sale and
discontinued operations
Measurement of non-current
assets (disposal group)
classified as held for sale
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Scope out - Measurement
provisions
• Deferred tax assets - Ind AS 12
• Financial assets - Ind AS 109
• Agriculture - Ind AS 41
• Contractual rights - Ind AS 104
• Employee benefits - Ind AS 19
Criteria for classifying existing
non-current assets (disposal
group) as held for sale
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.315
7.1 OBJECTIVE
Non-Current assets held for sale are presented separately from other assets in the Balance
Sheet as their classification will change and the value will be principally recovered through
sale transaction rather than through continuous use in operations of the entity. This standard
specifies the accounting for assets held for sale.
Results of Discontinuing Operations should be separately presented in the Statement of Profit
and loss as it affects the ability of the entity to generate future cash flows. This standard
specifies the presentation and disclosure of discontinued operations.
The disclosure information provided in the standard enhances the ability of users of financial
statements to make projections of an entity's cash flows, earnings-generating capacity, and
financial position by segregating information about held for sale assets and discontinued
operations from the information about continuing operations.
Hence, two core objectives of the standard are as follows:
Objective
Classification
Measurement and Presentation
Ind AS 105
Accounting for
non-current
assets held for
sale or disposal
groups
Measurement = at the lower of carrying amount and
fair value - costs to sell
Cessation of depreciation on such assets
Discontinued
operations
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Presented separately in the balance sheet
Results of discontinued operations to be presented
separately in the statement of profit and loss
Disclosure
A
5.316
FINANCIAL REPORTING
7.2 SCOPE
The classification and presentation requirements of this Ind AS apply to all recognised non-
current assets and to all disposal groups of an entity.
The measurement requirements of this Ind AS also apply to all recognised non-current assets
and to all disposal groups of an entity except few exceptions mentioned below.
Assets classified as non-current in accordance with Ind AS 1, Presentation of Financial
Statements, shall not be reclassified as current assets until they meet the criteria to be
classified as held for sale in accordance with this Ind AS.
The classification, presentation and measurement requirements in this Ind AS applicable to
a non-current asset (or disposal group) that is classified as held for sale apply also to a non-
current asset (or disposal group) that is classified as held for distribution to owners acting in
their capacity as owners.
Scoped out non-current assets: The measurement provisions of this Ind AS do not apply to
the following assets (which are covered by the Ind AS listed either as individual assets or as
part of a disposal group):
Deferred tax
Assets
Measurement Provisions of Ind
AS 105 do not apply to
Assets arising
from Employee
benefits
Financial
Assets
Non-current
Assets
Groups of
contracts
Ind AS 12,
Income taxes
Ind AS 19,
Employee
Benefits
Within the
scope of Ind
AS 109
Financial
Instruments
Which are
measured at
Fair value less
cost to sell in
accordance
with Ind AS 41,
Agriculture
Ind AS 117,
Insurance
Contracts
Disposal groups may include both scoped-in and scoped-out non-current assets. If a disposal
group includes any scoped-in non-current asset(s), the measurement requirements of this Ind
AS apply to the group as a whole, so that the group is measured at the lower of its carrying
amount and fair value less costs to sell.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.317
The disclosure requirements of this Ind AS, for non-current assets held for sale and
discontinued operations, remove the need to provide disclosures in accordance with other
standards, unless that standard has specific disclosure requirements:
for non-current assets (or disposal group) classified held for sale or discontinued
operations; or
for measurement of assets or liabilities within a disposal group that are not within the
measurement scope of Ind AS 105.
However, this does not remove the need to provide additional disclosures to comply with
Ind AS.
7.3 RELEVANT DEFINITIONS
The following are the key terms used in this standard:
Cash-generating unit is a smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows
that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
Component of an entity comprises operations and cash flows that can be clearly
distinguished, operationally and for financial reporting purposes, from the rest of the entity.
Costs to distribute are the incremental costs directly attributable to the distribution,
excluding finance costs and income tax expense.
Costs to sell are the incremental costs directly attributable to the disposal of an asset (or
disposal group), excluding finance costs and income tax expense.
Current asset - An entity classifies an asset as current when:
(a)
it expects to realise the asset, or intends to sell or consume it, in its normal operating
cycle;
(b)
it holds the asset primarily for the purpose of trading;
(c)
it expects to realise the asset within twelve months after the reporting period; or
(d)
the asset is cash or a cash equivalent (as defined in Ind AS 7) unless the asset is
restricted from being exchanged or used to settle a liability for at least twelve months
after the reporting period.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
A
5.318
FINANCIAL REPORTING
A discontinued operation is a component of an entity that either has been disposed of or is
classified as held for sale and:
(a)
represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations; or
(b)
(c)
is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or
geographical area of operations; or
is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Disposal group is a group of assets to be disposed of, by sale or otherwise, together as a
group in a single transaction, and liabilities directly associated with those assets that will be
transferred in the transaction. A disposal group may be a group of cash-generating units, a
single cash-generating unit, or part of a cash-generating unit.
The group includes goodwill acquired in a business combination if the group is a cash-
generating unit to which goodwill has been allocated in accordance with Ind AS 36
'Impairment of Assets', or if it is an operation within such a cash generating unit.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in
an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. (Ind AS 113)
Firm purchase commitment is an agreement with an unrelated party, binding on both parties
and usually legally enforceable, that (a) specifies all significant terms, including the price and
timing of the transactions, and (b) includes a disincentive for non-performance that is
sufficiently large to make performance highly probable.
Highly Probable Significantly more likely than probable. (Probable means more likely than
not)
Non-current assets are assets that do not meet the definition of current assets.
Recoverable amount is the higher of an asset's fair value less costs of disposal and its value
in use.
Value in use is the present value of estimated future cash flows expected to arise from the
continuing use of an asset and from its disposal at the end of its useful life.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.319
7.4 CLASSIFICATION OF NON-CURRENT ASSETS (OR
DISPOSAL GROUPS) AS HELD FOR SALE OR AS HELD FOR
DISTRIBUTION TO OWNERS
An entity is required to classify a non-current asset (or disposal group) as held for sale if its
carrying amount will be recovered principally through a sale transaction rather than through
continuing use.
Asset must be
available for immediate sale in its present condition and
Sale must be highly probable
are the two key requirements to classify a non-current asset as held for sale.
It may be noted that if an asset is being sold individually, Ind AS 105 applies only if it is a non-
current asset. A current asset being sold as an individual asset (i.e. not as part of a disposal
group) is never classified as held for sale. Where a group of assets is being disposed of in a
single transaction, its classification and presentation requirements apply to the disposal group as
a whole, including current assets and liabilities forming part of the group.
7.4.1 Available for Immediate Sale
The asset (or disposal group) must be available for immediate sale in its present condition. The
terms that are usual and customary for sale of similar assets (or disposal group) doesn't disqualify
to being classified as held for sale.
However, they will not be considered as available for immediate sale if they continue to be vital
for the entity's ongoing operations or being refurbished to enhance their value. Thus, an asset
(or disposal group) cannot be classified as a non-current asset (or disposal group) held for sale,
if the entity intends to sell it in a distant future.
Examples 1-5- Available for Immediate Sale
1.
A property being used as a headquarters by the entity needs to be vacated before it
can be sold. The time required to vacate the building is usual and customary for sale
of such assets. Hence the property can be considered as available for immediate sale.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.320
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.
3.
However, if property can be vacated only after a replacement is available then this may
indicate that the property is not available for immediate sale, but only after the
replacement becomes available.
An entity can't classify a manufacturing facility as held for sale if prior to selling the
facility it needs to clear a backlog of uncompleted orders.
However, if entity intends to sell the manufacturing facility along with the uncompleted
orders it can be considered as available for immediate sale.
An entity plans to renovate some of its property to increase its value prior to selling it
to a third party. The entity is already searching for a buyer at current market values.
But due to the plans to renovate the property prior to sale, the property may not be
meeting the condition of available for immediate sale.
4.
A company has put a property on the market and expects that all the conditions of
classification as held for sale are met. Any buyer will undertake searches and
valuations before making an offer and exchanging contracts: Such conditions are
normal for properties and any delays that might arise from such legal processes do not
preclude the property from being classified as held for sale.
5.
When minor pre-selling activities are outstanding, and those activities are usually
performed immediately before an asset is transferred, the asset could nevertheless be
appropriately treated as available for immediate sale.
However, when an asset is still in the course of construction, and significant activities
will need to be performed before it can be transferred, it is unlikely that it could be
regarded as available for immediate sale.
7.4.2 Sale must be highly probable
This Standard defines 'highly probable' as 'significantly more likely than probable' where probable
means more likely than not.
Ind AS 105 prescribes following five conditions to be satisfied for the sale to qualify as highly
probable:
1.
2.
The appropriate level of management must be committed to a plan to sell the asset (or
disposal group).
An active programme to trace a buyer and complete the selling plan must have been initiated.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.321
3.
4.
The asset (or disposal group) must be actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable
in relation to its current fair value.
The sale transaction is expected to be completed within one year from the date of
classification (subject to exception specified in section 7.4.3.2 below)
5. Significant changes to or withdrawal from the plan to sell the asset are unlikely.
The likelihood of shareholders' approval should also be considered as part of assessment if it is
required in the jurisdiction.
Examples 6 & 7- Requiring shareholder's approval
6
7.
At the end of the reporting period, ABC Company's board of directors has approved a plan
to sell a non-current asset. The eventual disposal requires approval by a majority of
company's shareholders through a formal vote which will take place after the reporting
period. At the end of the reporting period, a majority of the company's shareholders have
provided the company with signed irrevocable agreements stating that they will vote in
favour of the disposal. The 'highly probable' test is met because the shareholders have
irrevocably committed to approving the transaction and, therefore, the vote by the
shareholders is merely a formality.
Company XYZ holds an 85 per cent interest in a subsidiary, Company ABC. At the year
end, the board of directors of Company ABC has approved a plan to sell a non-current
asset to Company XYZ. The eventual disposal requires approval by a majority of Company
ABC's shareholders through a formal vote which will take place after the reporting period.
For a transaction with a major shareholder (in this case, the parent), the minority
shareholders are given protection in law if the value of the transaction exceeds a specified
threshold. The law prevents Company XYZ from participating in the formal vote on such a
transaction. Company ABC has not received any undertakings to vote in a particular
manner from any of the shareholders. It is possible that the proposed transaction may be
controversial, and the outcome of the shareholder vote is uncertain. From Company ABC's
perspective, the 'highly probable' test is not met at the end of the reporting period because
the outcome of the formal vote by the remaining shareholders is too uncertain.
7.4.3 Other Key Points
7.4.3.1 Loss of Control in Subsidiary
An entity which has committed to a sale plan which involves loss of control of subsidiary shall
classify all the assets and liabilities of that subsidiary as held for sale in its consolidated financial
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.322
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
statements when the criteria set out above is met, regardless of whether the entity will retain a
non-controlling interest in its former subsidiary after the sale.
7.4.3.2 Exception to the period of One year
An entity can still classify an asset (or disposal group) as held for sale, even if the timeframe of
one year to conclude the sale transaction has lapsed. For this:
(i)
(ii)
the delay must have been caused by the events or circumstances which are beyond the
control of the entity; and
there must be sufficient evidence that the entity is still committed to it selling plan.
Examples 8 - 10
8. An entity is committed to its selling plan of a manufacturing facility in its present
condition and so classifies it as held for sale. After a firm purchase commitment,
the buyer's inspection identifies environmental damages not previously known to
exist. The entity is required by the buyer to make good the damage, which will
extend the period required to complete the sale beyond one year. However, the
entity has initiated actions to make good the damage and satisfactory rectification is
highly probable. In this situation, exception to one-year requirement will be met.
9.
An entity in the mining industry is committed to a plan to sell a disposal group that
represents a significant portion of its regulated operations. The sale requires
regulatory approval, which could extend the period required to complete the sale
beyond one year. Actions necessary to obtain approval cannot be initiated until after
a buyer is known and a firm purchase commitment is obtained. However, a firm
purchase commitment is highly probable within one year. In this situation, the
exception to the one-year requirement will be met.
10. A company is committed to a plan to sell a non-current asset and classifies the asset
as held for sale. During the initial one-year period, the market conditions
deteriorated and, as a result, the asset could not be sold by the end of that period.
During that period, the company actively solicited but did not receive any reasonable
offers to purchase the asset and, in response, the Company reduced its asking price.
The asset continues to be actively marketed at a price that is reasonable given the
change in market conditions. In this situation, the exception to the one-year
requirement will be met. At the end of the initial one-year period, the asset would
continue to be classified as held for sale.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.323
7.4.3.3 Sale includes exchange
Sale transaction includes exchange of non-current assets for other non-current assets when the
exchange has commercial substance in accordance with Ind AS 16 Property, Plant and
Equipment.
7.4.3.4 Asset acquired exclusively with a view to subsequent disposal
When an entity acquires a non-current asset (or disposal group) exclusively with a view to its
subsequent disposal, the non-current asset (or disposal group) is classified as held for sale at the
acquisition date if both of the following conditions are satisfied:
(a)
(b)
The one-year requirement is met subject to exceptions mentioned in section 7.4.3.2 above;
and
It is highly probable that any other criteria (refer section 7.4.1 and 7.4.2 above) that is not
met at the acquisition date will be met within a short period following the acquisition (usually
within three months).
Example 11
An entity has acquired a building exclusively with a view of its subsequent disposal. The
management is highly confident that the property can be sold in one year. The property requires
refurbishing it to enhance its value which is highly probable to be completed in less than a
period of three months. The building will be classified as held for sale on the date of acquisition
itself even though it is not immediately available for sale.
7.4.3.5 Criteria met after reporting period
If the criteria of held for sale are met after the reporting period, an entity should not classify a non-
current asset (or disposal group) as held for sale in those financial statements when issued. However,
when those criteria are met after the reporting period but before the approval of the financial statements
for issue, the entity shall disclose the information specified in section 7.6.3 - Disclosures.
7.4.3.6 Classification as held for distribution
A non-current asset (or disposal group) is classified as held for distribution to owners when the
entity is committed to distribute the asset (or disposal group) to the owners. The assets must be
available for immediate distribution in their present condition and the distribution must be highly
probable. For the distribution to be highly probable, actions to complete the distribution must have
been initiated and should be expected to be completed within one year from the date of
classification. Actions required to complete the distribution should indicate that it is unlikely that
significant changes to the distribution will be made or that the distribution will be withdrawn.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.324
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The probability of shareholders' approval (if required in the jurisdiction) should be considered as
part of the assessment of whether the distribution is highly probable. For an entity to classify a
non-current asset (or disposal group) as held for distribution to its owner, it is necessary to follow
the same criteria as required for classification as held for sale.
7.4.3.7 Non-current assets to be abandoned
Non-current assets (or disposal group) that need to be abandoned will not qualify to classify as
held for sale because their carrying amount will be principally recovered through continuing use
in the entity's operation rather through the sale. However, if the disposal group to be abandoned
meets the criteria as prescribed in Ind AS 105 to be classified as a discontinued operation, then
the disclosure regarding discontinued operation must be presented.
Example 12
In February 20X2, PQR Limited decides to abandon all of its coal mines, which constitute a major
line of business. All work stops at the coal mines during the year ended 31st March 20X2. In the
financial statements for the year ended 31st March 20X1, results and cash flows of the coal mines
are treated as continuing operations. In the financial statements for the year ended
31st March 20X2, the results and cash flows of the coal mines are treated as discontinued
operations and PQR Limited is required to make the disclosures as per Ind AS 105.
Non-current assets (or disposal groups) to be abandoned include non-current assets (or disposal
groups) that are to be used to the end of their economic life and non-current assets (or disposal
groups) that are to be closed rather than sold.
Assets that are temporarily taken out of use are not to be accounted for as abandoned.
Example 13
Entity ceases to use a manufacturing plant because demand has declined. However, the plant
is maintained in a workable condition and it is expected to be brought back into use in future
when demand picks up.
It is neither to be treated as abandoned asset nor as held for sale because its carrying amount
will be principally recovered through continuous use, therefore the entity will not stop charging
depreciation or treat it as held for sale. This is because its carrying amount will be recovered
principally through continuing use to the end of its economic life.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
An entity shall classify a non-current asset (or disposal group) as held
for sale if its carrying amount will be recovered principally through
a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
5.325
Key
requirements
for Non-current
Assets held for
sale or held for
distribution to
owners
Available for
immediate
sale*/distribution
Sale /
distribution must
be highly
probable
In its present condition
Management is committed to a plan to sell / distribute
the asset
An active programme to locate a buyer and complete
the plan / distribution has been initiated
Asset is actively marketed for sale at a price that is
reasonable in relation to its current fair value***
Sale / distribution should be expected to qualify for
recognition as a completed sale/distribution within one
year from the date of classification**
It is unlikely that the significant changes to the plan
will be made for completion of plan / sale / distribution
or plan / distribution should not be withdrawn
*Sale transactions include exchanges of non-current assets for other non-current assets when the
exchange has commercial substance
** If the entity remains committed to its plan to sell the asset (or disposal group), events or
circumstances beyond the entity's control may extend the period to complete the sale beyond one
year
*** Not applicable for non-current assets held for distribution to owners.
Note:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.326
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
7.5 MEASUREMENT OF NON-CURRENT ASSETS (OR
DISPOSAL GROUPS) CLASSIFIED AS HELD FOR SALE
7.5.1 Measurement at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less
cost to sell
An entity should measure a non-current asset (or disposal group) classified as held for sale
at the lower of its carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
An entity shall measure a non-current asset (or disposal group) classified as held for
distribution to owners at the lower of its carrying amount and fair value less costs to distribute.
If a newly acquired asset (or disposal group) meets the criteria to be classified as held for
sale, it will be measured on initial recognition at the lower of its carrying amount had it not
been so classified (for example, cost) and fair value less costs to sell. Hence, if the asset (or
disposal group) is acquired as part of a business combination, it will be measured at fair value
less costs to sell.
Immediately before the initial classification of the asset (or disposal group) as held for sale,
the carrying amounts of the asset (or all the assets and liabilities in the group) is measured
in accordance with applicable Ind AS.
On subsequent remeasurement of a disposal group, the carrying amounts of any assets and
liabilities that are not within the scope of the measurement requirements of this Ind AS but
are included in a disposal group classified as held for sale, should be remeasured in
accordance with applicable Ind AS before the fair value less costs to sell of the disposal group
is remeasured.
When the sale is expected to occur beyond one year, the entity should measure the costs to
sell at their present value. Any increase in the present value of the costs to sell that arises
from the passage of time shall be presented in profit or loss as a financing cost.
7.5.2 Recognition of impairment losses and reversals
An entity should recognise an impairment loss for any initial or subsequent write-down of the
asset (or disposal group) to fair value less costs to sell, to the extent that it has not been
recognised in accordance with subsequent remeasurement of scoped out assets and
liabilities as mentioned above.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.327
An entity should recognise a gain for any subsequent increase in fair value less costs to sell
of an asset, but not in excess of the cumulative impairment loss that has been recognised
either in accordance with this Ind AS or previously in accordance with Ind AS 36.
Depreciation and amortization shall be immediately stopped from the moment the asset has
been classified as held for sale.
Interest and other expenses attributable to the liabilities of a disposal group classified as held
for sale shall continue to be recognised.
An entity should recognise a gain for any subsequent increase in fair value less costs to sell
of a disposal group:
(a)
(b)
to the extent that it has not been recognised in the remeasurement of scoped out non-
current assets, current assets and liablities; but
not in excess of the cumulative impairment loss that has been recognised, either in
accordance with this Ind AS or previously in accordance with Ind AS 36, on the non-
current assets that are within the scope of the measurement requirements of this Ind
AS.
The impairment loss (or any subsequent gain) recognised for a disposal group should reduce
(or increase) the carrying amount of the non-current assets in the group that are within the
scope of the measurement requirements of this Ind AS. The impairment loss shall be
allocated to disposal groups in the following order:
(i)
(ii)
first, to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the disposal group;
and
then to the other assets of the disposal group pro rata on the basis of the carrying
amount of each asset in the group.
A gain or loss not previously recognised through remeasurement by the date of the sale of a
non-current asset (or disposal group) should be recognised at the date of derecognition.
Requirements relating to derecognition are set out in:
(a)
paragraphs 67-72 of Ind AS 16 'Property, Plant and Equipment'; and
(b)
paragraphs 112-117 of Ind AS 38, 'Intangible Assets', for intangible assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.328
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 1 - Measurement prior to classification as held for sale
Entity ABC owns an item of property and it was stated at the following amounts in its last
financial statements:
The asset is depreciated at an annual rate of 10% i.e.  1,20,000 р.а.
Entity ABC closes its books as on 31st March each year. During July, 20X1, entity ABC
decides to sell the asset and on 1st August it meets the conditions to be classified as held
for sale.
Analyse what will be the treatment of the property in the books for the year 20X1-20X2.
Solution
At 31st July, entity ABC should ensure that the asset is measured in accordance with
Ind AS 16. It should be depreciated by further 40,000 (₹1,20,000 x 4/12) and should be
carried at 5,60,000 before it is measured in accordance with Ind AS 105.
Note: From the date the asset is classified as held for sale no further depreciation will be
charged.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.329
On next reporting date, the property's fair value less costs to sell is estimated at 85,000.
Accordingly, a loss of  15,000 is recognised in profit or loss and the property is carried at
 85,000.
Subsequently, the property is sold for  90,000. A gain of  5,000 will be recognised.
Example 15 - Disposal group classified as Held for Sale:
The entity should recognise the loss of
1,100 ( 16,000 ₹14,900), in accordance with
applicable Ind AS, immediately before classifying it as held for sale. This difference of  1,100
reflects routine accounting entries (such as revaluation). This amount shall not be considered as
impairment loss.
The entity estimated that fair value less costs to sell of the disposal group amounts to 13,000.
Since the entity has classified a disposal group as held for sale it should measure it at the lower
of its carrying amount 14,900 and fair value less costs to sell 13,000 which comes to  13,000.
The entity should recognises an impairment loss of ₹ 1,900 (14,900 – 13,000) when the disposal
group is initially classified as held for sale.
The Inventory and Investment is remeasured as per Ind AS 2 and Ind AS 109 at not more than
fair value at the date of remeasurement i.e. immediately before classified as held for sale.
This impairment loss of 1,900 is allocated to remaining assets in the proportion of their carrying
value other than inventory and investment in equity instrument.
The allocation of impairment loss can be illustrated as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.330
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Firstly, the impairment loss reduces the amount of goodwill in the disposal group. Then, the
remaining impairment loss is recognised to other assets pro-rata based on the carrying amount of
those assets.
Suppose, at the end of reporting period the fair value less cost to sell is increased and estimated
at 15,500.
The maximum impairment loss reversal allowed will be 1,900 being impairment loss recognised
earlier.
Reversal of impairment loss on Goodwill is not allowed under Ind AS 36 'Impairment of Assets'.
Example 16 - Reversal of Impairment Losses
A freehold property was originally acquired for 40,00,000. Some years later, after cumulative
depreciation of  11,00,000 has been recognised, an impairment loss of 3,50,000 is recognised,
taking the carrying amount to 25,50,000, which represents the estimated value in use of the
property. Shortly thereafter, as a consequence of a proposed move to new premises, the freehold
property is classified as held for sale.
At the time of classification as held for sale:
carrying amount is  25,50,000; and
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.331
fair value less costs to sell is assessed at 25,00,000.
Accordingly, the initial write-down on classification as held for sale is 50,000 and the property
is carried at 25,00,000. Following classification as held for sale, no further depreciation is
recognised.
At the next reporting date, the property market has improved and fair value less costs to sell is
reassessed at 26,50,000. The gain of  1,50,000 is less than the cumulative impairment losses
recognised to date $(\vec{r}3,50,000+\overline{r}50,000=\overline{r}4,00,000)$. Accordingly, it is credited in profit or
loss and the property is carried at 26,50,000.
Six months after that, the property market has continued to improve, and fair value less costs to
sell is now assessed at 30,00,000. This further gain of  3,50,000 is, however, in excess of the
cumulative impairment losses recognised to date $(\vec{r}&3,50,000+\overline{\pi}&50,000-\overline{\pi}&1,50,000=$
2,50,000). Accordingly, a restricted gain of₹2,50,000 is credited in profit or loss and the
property is carried at 29,00,000.
Subsequently, the property is sold for 30,00,000, at which time a gain of  1,00,000 is
recognised.
7.5.3 Changes to a plan of sale
If an entity has classified an asset (or disposal group) as held for sale, but the held for sale
criteria is no longer met, the entity should cease to classify the asset (or disposal group) as
held for sale.
The entity shall measure a non-current asset that ceases to be classified as held for sale (or
ceases to be included in a disposal group classified as held for sale) at the lower of:
(a)
(b)
its carrying amount before the asset (or disposal group) was classified as held for sale,
adjusted for any depreciation, amortisation or revaluations that would have been
recognised had the asset (or disposal group) not been classified as held for sale; and
its recoverable amount at the date of the subsequent decision not to sell.
The entity shall include any required adjustment to the carrying amount of a non-current asset
that ceases to be classified as held for sale in profit or loss from continuing operations in the
period in which the held for sale criteria is no longer met.
Financial statements for the periods since classification as held for sale / distribution to
owners shall be amended accordingly if the disposal group or non-current asset that ceases
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.332
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
to be classified as held for sale / distribution to owners is a subsidiary, joint operation, joint
venture, associate, or a portion of an interest in a joint venture or an associate.
If an entity removes an individual asset or liability from a disposal group classified as held for
sale, the remaining assets and liabilities of the disposal group will continue to be measured
as a group only if the group meets the criteria for classification as held for sale. Otherwise:
(a)
(b)
the remaining non-current assets of the group that individually meet the criteria to be
classified as held for sale shall be measured individually at the lower of their carrying
amounts and fair values less costs to sell at that date; and
any non-current assets that do not meet the criteria shall cease to be classified as held
for sale.
Example 17: Remeasuring non-current assets that are no longer held for sale
Company ABC has several operations including the manufacture and sale of leisure equipment.
Company ABC financial year ends on 31 March. In April, Company ABC adopts a plan to sell all
of the assets and liabilities of the leisure equipment operations. Having met the requirements of
Ind AS 105 at the end of the first quarter, Company ABC appropriately classifies those assets and
liabilities as a disposal group held for sale.
In September, Company ABC decides not to sell certain existing trademarks and licence
arrangements associated with the leisure equipment operations. Subsequent to the sale of the
other assets and liabilities, Company ABC will continue to generate revenue (and incur the
associated costs) from its trademarks and licences.
Company ABC should reclassify the trademarks and licence arrangements out of assets held for
sale and remeasure them at the lower of (1) their carrying amounts before being classified as held
for sale less any amortisation expense that would have been recognised if they had not been
classified as held for sale, and (2) their recoverable amount at the date of the subsequent decision
not to sell.
If this requirement triggers an adjustment to the carrying amounts of the trademarks and licences,
assuming that the assets were not revalued in accordance with Ind AS 38 before classification as
held for sale, the adjustment should be included in profit or loss from continuing operations in the
period in which the held for sale criteria are no longer met. The adjustment should be included in
the same caption in the statement of profit and loss used to present other gains or losses, if any,
on held for sale items not meeting the definition of discontinued operations.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.333
If the remaining assets and liabilities of the leisure equipment operations continue to meet the
conditions to be accounted for as held for sale, Company ABC should continue to classify those
remaining assets and liabilities as held for sale.
Illustration 2
S Ltd purchased a property for 6,00,000 on 1st April, 20X1. The useful life of the property is
15 years. On 31st March, 20X3, S Ltd classified the property as held for sale. The impairment
testing provides the estimated recoverable amount of  4,70,000.
The fair value less cost to sell on 31st March, 20X3 was 4,60,000. On 31st March, 20X4
management changed the plan, as property no longer met the criteria of held for sale. The
recoverable amount as at 31st March, 20X4 is  5,00,000.
Recommend the accounting treatment of events for the year ending 31st March, 20X3 and
31st March, 20X4 and value the property at the end of 20X3 and 20X4.
Solution
(a)
Value of property immediately before the classification as held for sale as per Ind AS 16 as
On initial classification as held for sale on 31st March, 20X3, the value will be lower of:
Depreciation of  40,000 and Impairment Loss of ₹60,000 (50,000 +10,000) is charged
in profit or loss for the year ended 31st March, 20X3.
(b)
On 31st March, 20X4, held for sale property is reclassified as criteria is not met. The value
will be lower of:
Carrying amount immediately before classification on 31st March, 20X3  4,70,000
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.334
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Less: Depreciation based on 13 years balance life
(36,154)
Carrying amount had the asset is not classified as held for sale
 4,33,846
Recoverable Amount
 5,00,000
Property will be valued at 4,33,846 on 31st March, 20X4
Adjustment to the carrying amount of 26,154 ( 4,60,000 - 4,33,846) is charged to the profit
or loss.
7.6 PRESENTATION AND DISCLOSURES OF A NON-
CURRENT ASSET (OR DISPOSAL GROUP) CLASSIFIED
AS HELD FOR SALE
7.6.1 Non - current assets and disposal groups classified as held for sale
Entity shall present and disclose information about non- current asset (or disposal group)
classified as held for sale in such a manner that enable the user of financial statements to
evaluate financial effects of non-current asset (or disposal group) classified as held for sale.
7.6.2 Presentation
An entity is required to present a non-current asset classified as held for sale and the assets
of a disposal group classified as held for sale separately from other assets in the balance
sheet.
The liabilities of a disposal group classified as held for sale should be presented separately
from other liabilities in the balance sheet. Those assets and liabilities should not be offset
and presented as a single amount.
The major classes of assets and liabilities classified as held for sale should be separately
disclosed either in the balance sheet or in the notes, except when the disposal group is a
newly acquired subsidiary that meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale on
acquisition.
An entity should present separately any cumulative income or expense recognised in other
comprehensive income relating to a non-current asset (or disposal group) classified as held
for sale.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.335
If the disposal group is a newly acquired subsidiary that meets the criteria to be classified as
held for sale on acquisition, disclosure of the major classes of assets and liabilities is not
required.
Comparative amounts for non-current assets or for the assets and liabilities of disposal
groups classified as held for sale in the balance sheets for prior periods are not reclassified
or re-presented to reflect the classification in the balance sheet for the latest period
presented. For example, if an asset qualifies as held for sale during 20X2, it should be
classified as such in the balance sheet at the end of 20X2, but not in the 20X1 comparative
balance sheet.
Any gain or loss on the remeasurement of a non-current asset (or disposal group) classified
as held for sale that does not meet the definition of a discontinued operation shall be included
in profit or loss from continuing operations.
An amount of 400 relating to these assets has been recognised in other comprehensive
income and accumulated in equity.
The presentation of disposal group in entity's Balance Sheet is as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.336
FINANCIAL REPORTING
7.6.3 Disclosures
An entity should disclose the following information in the notes to the financial statements in the
period in which a non-current asset (or disposal group) has been either classified as held for sale
or sold:
(a)
Description of the non-current asset (or disposal group);
(b)
Description of facts and circumstances of the sale, or leading to the expected disposal and
the expected manner and timing of that disposal;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(c)
(d)
(e)
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.337
Gain or loss recognised and if not presented separately on the face of the statement of profit
and loss, the caption in the statement of profit and loss that includes that gain or loss.
If applicable, the reportable segment in which the non-current asset (or disposal group) is
presented in accordance of Ind AS 108 Operating Segments.
If there is a change of plan to sell, a description of facts and circumstances leading to the
decision and the effect of the decision on the results of operations for the period and any prior
periods presented.
7.7 DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
7.7.1 Discontinued operation – definition
Ind AS 105 defines Discontinued Operation as a component of an entity that either has been
disposed of or is classified as held for sale and:
(a)
(b)
(c)
represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations; or
is part of a single co-ordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business
or geographical area of operations; or
is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Examples 19-22 - Discontinued Operations
19. Company XYZ has 5 different operating segments, one of which solely produces
consumer goods. All of the consumer goods production facilities are situated in
Central Europe. XYZ also has other operations in Central Europe for other operating
segments. In April 20X1, XYZ disposed of its consumer goods segment which meets
the definition of a component of a business and represents a separate major line of
business and would therefore be considered as a discontinued operation.
20. A group has announced that it is closing an engineering contracting segment.
Although no new contracts are being undertaken, all existing contracts will be
completed and the business will be run down accordingly. In this situation, the
operation will have ceased to be used when the contracting activity has been
completed (that is, at the end of the last contract). In the period during which existing
contracts are completed, the group is continuing to carry out a revenue-earning
activity, albeit that the activity is being wound down, and so it does not qualify as a
discontinued operation.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
A
5.338
FINANCIAL REPORTING
21. A company carried out a merchandise wholesaling business that is operated from
several leasehold premises throughout the country. The business has been closed,
all stocks have been disposed of, and employees have been made redundant before
the end of three months into the next financial year. At that time, some debtors
remain to be collected, and costs will continue to be incurred in respect of the
vacated premises until the leases are disposed of. In this case, the former activity
of merchandise wholesaling has ceased. The outstanding future transactions do not
constitute the continuation of the activity and, consequently, the operation has been
discontinued.
22. XYZ Company has one business segment, and it operates in the UK, the US and
Australia. Each of these operations represents a component of XYZ and a major
geographical area of operations. Management has decided to sell the US operation,
which met the criteria to be classified as held for sale during the year. The US
operation should be disclosed in XYZ's financial statements as a discontinued
operation, despite the fact that there has been no change to the number of business
segments.
A component of an entity comprises operations and cash flows that can be clearly
distinguished, operationally and for financial reporting purposes, from the rest of the entity.
In other words, a component of an entity will be a cash-generating unit or a group of cash-
generating units while being held for use.
Illustration 3
Identify whether each of the following scenarios give rise to a discontinued operation and/or
classification of assets as held for sale:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.339
Solution
Discontinued operations and assets held for sale
*****
Illustration 4
Sun Ltd is a retailer of takeaway food like burger and pizzas. It decides to sell one of its
outlets located in Chandani Chowk in New Delhi. The company will continue to run 200
other outlets in New Delhi.
All criteria mentioned in Ind AS 105 for classification of assets as held for sale were first
met on1st October, 20X1. The outlet will be sold in June, 20X2.
Management believes that outlet is a discontinued operation and wants to present the
results of outlet as 'discontinued operations'.
Analyse the opinion of the management with respect to the accounting treatment of the
outlet.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
A
5.340
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
The Chandani Chowk outlet is a disposal group; it is not a discontinued operation as it is
only one outlet. It is not a major line of business or geographical area, nor a subsidiary
acquired with a view to resale.
****
7.7.2 Separate presentation of discontinued operations
An entity should present and disclose information that enables users of the financial statements
to evaluate the financial effects of discontinued operations and disposals of non-current assets
(or disposal groups).
This allows the user to distinguish between the operations which will continue in the future and
those which will not and make it more predictable the ability of entity to generate future cash flows.
When the amounts relating to discontinued operations are presented separately, the comparative
figures for prior periods are also re-presented, so that the disclosures relate to all operations that
have been discontinued by the end of the reporting period for the latest period presented.
7.7.3 Presentation in the statement of profit and loss
An entity shall disclose a single amount in the statement of profit and loss comprising the
total of:
(a)
the post-tax profit or loss of discontinued operations; and
(b)
the post-tax gain or loss recognised on the measurement to fair value less costs to
sell or on the disposal of the assets or disposal group(s) constituting the discontinued
operation.
In addition, this single amount must be analysed into:
(a)
the revenue, expenses and pre-tax profit or loss of discontinued operations;
(b)
the related income tax expense as required by paragraph 81(h) of Ind AS 12;
(c)
the gain or loss recognised on the measurement to fair value less costs to sell or on
the disposal of the assets or disposal group(s) constituting the discontinued operation;
and
(d)
the related income tax expense as required by paragraph 81(h) of Ind AS 12.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.341
The analysis may be presented in the notes or in the statement of profit and loss. If it is
presented in the statement of profit and loss it should be presented in a section identified as
relating to discontinued operations, i.e. separately from continuing operations. The analysis
is not required for disposal groups that are newly acquired subsidiaries that meet the criteria
to be classified as held for sale on acquisition.
Entities are required to disclose the amount of income from continuing operations and from
discontinued operations attributable to owners of the parent. These disclosures may be
presented either in the notes or in the statement of profit and loss.
7.7.4 Disclosures in the statement of cash flows
Disclose the net cash flows attributable to the operating, investing and financing activities of
discontinued operations. These disclosures may be presented either in the notes or in the
financial statements. These disclosures are not required for disposal groups that are newly
acquired subsidiaries that meet the criteria to be classified as held for sale on acquisition.
7.7.5 Disclosures of Earnings per share
Earnings per share amounts should be shown separately when an entity reports discontinued
operations. Paragraph 68 of Ind AS 33 requires an entity that reports discontinued operations to
present basic and diluted per share amounts for discontinued operations, either in the statement
of profit and loss or in the notes to the financial statements. This disclosure is required in addition
to the presentation of basic and diluted per share amounts for profit or loss from continuing
operations and profit or loss for the year, both of which should be shown in the statement of profit
and loss with equal prominence.
7.7.6 Adjustment to prior period disposals
Adjustments in the current period to amounts previously presented in discontinued operations that
are directly related to the disposal of a discontinued operation in a prior period should be classified
separately in discontinued operations. The nature and amount of such adjustments are disclosed.
Examples of circumstances in which these adjustments may arise include the following:
(a) the resolution of uncertainties that arise from the terms of the disposal transaction, such as
the resolution of purchase price adjustments and indemnification issues with the purchaser;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
A
5.342
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
the resolution of uncertainties that arise from and are directly related to the operations of the
component before its disposal, such as environmental and product warranty obligations
retained by the seller; and
the settlement of employee benefit plan obligations, provided that the settlement is directly
related to the disposal transaction.
7.7.7 Change to a plan of sale
If an entity ceases to classify a component of an entity as held for sale, the results of operations
of the component previously presented in discontinued operations should be reclassified and
included in income from continuing operations for all periods presented. The amounts for prior
periods should be described as having been re-presented.
7.7.8 Loss of Control in Subsidiary
An entity that is committed to a sale plan involving loss of control of a subsidiary should disclose
the information as above when the subsidiary is a disposal group that meets the definition of a
discontinued operation.
Example 23: Presentation of Discontinued Operations in the Statement of profit and loss.
Statement of profit and loss for the year ended 31st March, 20X3
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.343
* the required analysis would be given in the notes.
57.8 EXTRACTS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF LISTED
ENTITY
Following is the extract from the financial statements of the listed entity 'Hindustan Unilever
Limited' for the financial year 2021-2022 with respect to 'Assets held for Sale' and its accounting
policy thereon.
Standalone Balance Sheet
as at 31st March, 2022
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(All amounts in crores, unless otherwise stated)
5.344
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
NOTE 16 ASSETS HELD FOR SALE
Non-current assets or disposal groups comprising of assets and liabilities are classified as 'held for sale' when all the
following criteria are met: (i) decision has been made to sell, (ii) the assets are available for immediate sale in its present
condition, (iii) the assets are being actively marketed and (iv) sale has been agreed or is expected to be concluded within
12 months of the Balance Sheet date.
Subsequently, such non-current assets and disposal groups classified as 'held for sale' are measured at the lower of its
carrying value and fair value less costs to sell. Non-current assets held for sale are not depreciated or amortised.
The Company has sold land with net book value (NBV) of ₹1 crore (31st March, 2021: 20 crore), buildings with NBV of ₹3
crores (31st March, 2021:₹1 crore) and plant & equipment with NBV of ₹0 crore (31st March, 2021: Nil). The gain on such sale
has been credited to the standalone statement of profit and loss under exceptional items.
(Source: Annual Report 2021-2022 - 'Hindustan Unilever Limited')
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.345
7.9 SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN IND AS 105 VIS-À-VIS
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.346
A
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.347
FOR SHORTCUT TO IND AS WISDOM: SCAN ME!
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Questions
1.
On 28th February, 20X1, Entity X becomes committed to a plan to sell a property. However,
it plans certain renovations to increase its value prior to selling it. The renovations are
expected to be completed within a short span of time i.e., 2 months.
Comment whether the property can be classified as held for sale at the reporting date i.e.
31st March, 20X1.
2.
On 1st March, 20X1, entity R decides to sell one of its factories. An agent is appointed and
the factory is actively marketed. As on 31st March, 20X1, it is expected that the factory will
be sold by 28th February, 20X2. However, in May 20X1, the market price of the factory
deteriorated. Entity R believed that the market would recover and thus did not reduce the
price of the factory. The company's accounts are authorised for issue on 26th June, 20X1.
Recommend whether the factory should be shown as held for sale as on 31st March, 20X1.
3.
On 1st June, 20X1, entity X plans to sell a group of assets and liabilities, which is classified
as a disposal group. On 31st July, 20X1, the Board of Directors approves and becomes
committed to the plan to sell the manufacturing unit by entering into a firm purchase
commitment with entity Y. However, since the manufacturing unit is regulated, the approval
from the regulator is needed for sale. The approval from the regulator is customary and highly
probable to be received by 30th November, 20X1 and the sale is expected to be completed
by 31st March, 20X2. Entity X follows December year end.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.348
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The assets and liabilities attributable to this manufacturing unit are as under:
(Amount in)
The fair value of the manufacturing unit as on 31st December, 20X0 is 2,000 and as on
31st July, 20X1 is 1,850. The cost to sell is
100 on both these dates. The disposal group
is not sold at the period end i.e., 31st
December, 20X1. The fair value as on
31st December, 20X1 is lower than the carrying value of the disposal group as on that date.
Required:
1.
Assess whether the manufacturing unit can be classified as held for sale and reasons
there for. If yes, then at which date?
2.
Measure the manufacturing unit on the date of classification as held for sale.
3.
Measure the manufacturing unit at the end of the year.
4.
on:
Following is the extract of the consolidated financial statements of A Ltd. for the year ended
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.349
On 15th September 20X1, Entity A decided to sell the business. It noted that the business
meets the condition of disposal group classified as held for sale on that date in accordance
with Ind AS 105. However, it does not meet the conditions to be classified as discontinued
operations in accordance with that standard.
The disposal group is stated at the following amounts immediately prior to reclassification as
held for sale.
Entity A proposed to sell the disposal group at 19,00,000. It estimates that the costs to sell
will be 70,000. This cost consists of professional fee to be paid to external lawyers and
accountants.
As at 31st March 20X2, there has been no change to the plan to sell the disposal group and
entity A still expects to sell it within one year of initial classification. Mr. X, an accountant of
Entity A remeasured the following assets / liabilities in accordance with respective standards
as on 31st March 20X2:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.350
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The disposal group has not been trading well and its fair value less costs to sell has fallen
to  16,50,000.
Compute the value of all assets/ labilities within the disposal group as on the following
dates in accordance with Ind AS 105:
(a)
15 September, 20X1 and
(b)
31st March, 20X2
5.
CK Ltd. prepares the financial statement under Ind AS for the quarter and the year ended
30th June, 20X1. During the 3 months ended 30th June, 20X1, the following events occurred:
On 1st April, 20X1, the Company has decided to sell one of its divisions as a going concern
following a recent change in its geographical focus. The proposed sale would involve the
buyer acquiring the non-monetary assets (including goodwill) of the division, with the
Company collecting any outstanding trade receivables relating to the division and settling any
current liabilities.
On 1st April, 20X1, the carrying amount of the assets of the division were as follows:
Purchased Goodwill - 60,000
Property, Plant & Equipment (average remaining estimated useful life two years) -
 20,00,000
Inventories - 10,00,000
From 1st April, 20X1, the Company has started to actively market the division and has
received number of serious enquiries. On 1st April, 20X1 the directors estimated that they
would receive 32,00,000 from the sale of the division. Since 1st April, 20X1, market
condition has improved and as on 1st August, 20X1 the Company received and accepted a
firm offer to purchase the division for
33,00,000.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.351
The sale is expected to be completed on $30^{th}$ September, 20X1 and 33,00,000 can be
assumed to be a reasonable estimate of the value of the division as on $30^{th}$ June, 20X1.
During the period from 1st April to $30^{th}$ June inventories of the division costing 8,00,000
were sold for 12,00,000. At $30^{th}$ June, 20X1, the total cost of the inventories of the division
was
9,00,000. All of these inventories have an estimated net realisable value that is in
excess of their cost.
Suggest how the proposed sale of the division will be reported in the interim financial
statements for the quarter ended 30th June, 20X1 giving relevant explanations.
Answers
1.
2.
The property cannot be classified as held for sale at the balance sheet date as it is not
available for sale immediately in its present condition. Although the renovations are expected
to be completed within a short span 2 months, this fact is not relevant for classification. The
delay in the timing of the transfer of the property imposed by the Entity X demonstrates that
the property is not available for immediate sale.
However, if the PPE meets the criteria for held for sale by $30^{th}$ April, 20X1 (i.e., 2 months
from 28th February, 20X1) and the accounts are not authorised by that date, then necessary
disclosures need to be given in the financial statements.
The factory ceases to meet the definition of held for sale post the balance sheet date but
before the financial statements are authorised for issue, as it is not actively marketed at a
reasonable price. But, since the market conditions deteriorated post the balance sheet date,
the asset will be classified as held for sale as at $31^{st}$ March, 20X1.
3. Assessing whether the manufacturing unit can be classified as held for sale
The manufacturing unit can be classified as held for sale due to the following reasons:
(a)
(b)
(c)
The disposal group is available for immediate sale and in its present condition. The
regulatory approval is customary and it is expected to be received in one year. The
date at which the disposal group must be classified as held for sale is 31st July, 20X1,
i.e., the date at which management becomes committed to the plan.
The sale is highly probable as the appropriate level of management i.e., board of
directors in this case have approved the plan.
A firm purchase agreement has been entered with the buyer.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
A
5.352
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(d)
The sale is expected to be complete by 31st March, 20X2, i.e., within one year from
the date of classification.
Measurement of the manufacturing unit as on the date of classification as held for
sale
Following steps need to be followed:
Step 1: Immediately before the initial classification of the asset (or disposal group) as held
for sale, the carrying amounts of the asset (or all the assets and liabilities in the group) shall
be measured in accordance with applicable Ind AS.
This has been done and the carrying value of the disposal group as on 31st July, 20X1 is
determined at 2,600. The difference between the carrying value as on 31st December,
20X0 and 31st July, 20X1 is accounted for as per the relevant Ind AS.
Step 2: An entity shall measure a non-current asset (or disposal group) classified as held for
sale at the lower of its carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
The fair value less cost to sell of the disposal group as on 31st July, 20X1 is 1,750 (i.e.
1,850 100). This is lower than the carrying value of 2,600. Thus, an impairment loss
needs to be recognised and allocated first towards goodwill and thereafter pro-rata between
non-current assets of the disposal group which are within the scope of Ind AS 105 based on
their carrying value.
Thus, the assets will be measured as under:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
4.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.353
Measurement of the manufacturing unit as on the date of classification as at the year
end
The measurement as at the year-end shall be on similar lines as done above.
The assets and liabilities in the disposal group not within the scope of this Standard are
measured as per the respective Standards.
The fair value less cost to sell of the disposal group as a whole is calculated. This fair value
less cost to sell as at the year-end shall be compared with the carrying value as at the date
of classification as held for sale. It is provided that the fair value as on the year end is less
than the carrying amount as on that date - thus the impairment loss shall be allocated in the
same way between the assets of the disposal group falling within the scope of this standard
as shown above.
(a)
As at 15th September, 20X1
The disposal group should be measured at 18,30,000 (19,00,000-70,000). The
impairment write down of 3,30,000 (₹21,60,000  ₹18,30,000) should be recorded
within profit from continuing operations.
The impairment of 3,30,000 should be allocated to the carrying values of the
appropriate non-current assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.354
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
The impairment loss is allocated first to goodwill and then prorata to the other assets
of the disposal group within Ind AS 105 measurement scope. Following assets are
not in the measurement scope of the standard- financial asset measured at other
comprehensive income, the deferred tax asset or the current assets. In addition, the
impairment allocation can only be made against assets and is not allocated to
liabilities.
As on 31 March, 20X2:
All of the assets and liabilities, outside the scope of measurement under Ind AS 105,
are remeasured in accordance with the relevant standards. The assets that are
remeasured in this case under the relevant standards are the financial asset measured
at fair value through other comprehensive income (Ind AS 109), the deferred tax asset
(Ind AS 12), the current assets and liabilities (various standards) and the non-current
liabilities (Ind AS 37).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.
INDIAN ACCOUNTING STANDARD 105
5.355
The decision to offer the division for sale on 1st April, 20X1 means that from that date the
division has been classified as held for sale. The division available for immediate sale, is
being actively marketed at a reasonable price and the sale is expected to be completed within
one year.
The consequence of this classification is that the assets of the division will be measured at
the lower of their existing carrying amounts and their fair value less cost to sell. Here the
division shall be measured at their existing carrying amount ie
30,60,000 since it is less
than the fair value less cost to sell 32,00,000.
The increase in expected selling price will not be accounted for since earlier there was no
impairment to division held for sale.
The assets of the division need to be presented separately from other assets in the balance
sheet. Their major classes should be separately disclosed either on the face of the balance
sheet or in the notes.
The Property, Plant and Equipment shall not be depreciated after 1st April, 20X1 so its
carrying value at 30th June, 20X1 will be₹20,00,000 only. The inventories of the division will
be shown at 9,00,000.
The division will be regarded as discontinued operation for the quarter ended
30th June, 20X1. It represents a separate line of business and is held for sale at the year
end.
The Statement of Profit and Loss should disclose, as a single amount, the post-tax profit or
loss of the division on classification as held for sale.
Further, as per Ind AS 33, EPS will also be disclosed separately for the discontinued
operation.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
