CHAPTER
11
ACCOUNTING AND
REPORTING OF FINANCIAL
INSTRUMENTS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
Define financial asset, financial liability and equity
Examine the scope of financial instruments and items excluded from
scope of financial instruments
Understand the application of these definitions and scope to different
forms of instruments
Determine whether the financial instruments such as preference shares,
debentures and bonds will be classified under “equity” or “financial
liabilities" or components thereof will be classified under both
Apply necessary accounting principles for determining when a financial
liability can be offset with a financial asset
Apply accounting principles for recognition of financial assets and
financial liabilities
Classify financial asset and financial liability
Determine the accounting treatment for regular way purchase or sale of
financial assets
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.2
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Measure financial assets initially and subsequently
Measure financial liability initially and subsequently
Reclassify the financial instrument and deal with the accounting aspect
upon reclassification
Acquire the conceptual understanding of “derivatives” and “embedded
derivatives",
Identify the situations in which embedded derivatives need to be
separated and
Deal with the Accounting principles in the situations in which embedded
derivatives are so separated
Identify the hedged items
Designate the items as hedged items/instruments
Qualify instruments for hedge accounting
Determine the criteria for qualifying the items as hedge items and its
accounting.
Determine whether or not a transfer qualifies for derecognition and
accounting treatment in various situations
Apply accounting principles for derecognition of financial liabilities,
including evaluating practical complexities involved in exchange of
financial instruments or parts thereof
Disclose necessary details regarding financial instruments as per the
standards
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.3
CHAPTER OVERVIEW☐
The chapter is divided into 7 units-
a) Unit 1 'Financial Instruments: Scope and Definitions' deals with a brief introduction of
financial instruments, definitions of financial instrument, financial asset, financial liability
and equity instrument. It also discusses the contracts which are included and excluded
from the scope of the standards on Financial Instruments.
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Unit 2 'Classification and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial
Liabilities', deals with criterias for classification, measurement (initially and
subsequently), reclassification of financial assets and financial liabilities. It further
discusses impairment of financial assets.
Unit 3 'Financial Instruments: Equity and Financial Liabilities' covers the analysis of
the definition of financial liabilities and equity. It also deliberates critical features in
differentiating a financial liability from an equity instrument and delves into various
aspects which help in determining the liability as financial liability. The unit also explains
when an instrument is a compound financial instrument. It also analyses treasury shares,
interest, dividends, losses and gains. Finally, it elucidates offsetting a financial asset and
financial liability.
Unit 4 'Derivatives and Embedded Derivatives' defines the two derivatives with
examples and the manner of separating the embedded derivatives from the host contract
alongwith the characteristics differences and deals with the accounting thereof.
Unit 5 'Recognition and Derecognition of Financial Instruments' covers guidance
prescribed in the standard on initial recognition of financial instruments. It also takes into
account, the timings of recognition and accounting treatment under various situations.
Later on, it discusses the derecognition of financial instruments and situations under
which derecognition will be considered or not. The unit also covers the extinguishment
and modification of financial liabilities and accounting of debt for equity swaps.
Unit 6 'Hedge Accounting' covers identification and designation of hedge items, criteria
qualifying an item as hedge item and accounting thereof.
g)
Unit 7 'Disclosures' covers disclosure requirements as stated in the standard.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.4
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Ind AS 32
'Financial
Instruments:
Presentation
Ind AS 109
'Financial
Instruments'
Ind AS 107
'Financial
Instruments:
Disclosures'
Disclosures
Measurement of
financial assets
Classification
of financial
&
financial
liabilities and
assets &
Presentation of
Impairment,
Recognition &
de-recognition
of financial
financial
liabilities
Gains
and
losses
on
assets &
financial
Derivative
&
Hedge
accounting
financial
liabilities
instruments
Definitions
Classification
as Liability
v/s Equity
Compound
financial
Offsetting
financial asset
& financial
instruments
liability
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Presentation of
interest,
dividends,
losses, and
gains on
financial liability
and equity
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.5
UNIT 1:
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS: SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
1.1 INTRODUCTION
With the changing landscape of Indian economy and more liberalisation, raising funds in national
and international markets through different forms of instruments has gathered momentum. As
companies expand their horizon, investors at the same time are getting cautious to invest through
different means to achieve their intended objective, which could have fixed return like a debt
instrument or a residual share in net assets like equity or both. Several type of instruments are
issued like convertible preference shares, FCCBs, foreign currency loans, debt syndication
arrangements, loans from group companies, etc. by borrowing entities for raising funds.
Accounting treatment of these instruments in the books, with introduction of Indian Accounting
Standards (Ind AS) is important for us to understand to reflect proper financial reporting for users
of financial statements that provides relevant and faithful representation of the financial
performance, financial position, and cash flows of the reporting entity.
MCA notified following Ind AS to deal with accounting of financial instruments:
Ind AS 109- Financial instruments
Ind AS 32 - Financial instruments: Presentation
Ind AS 107 - Financial Instruments: Disclosures
These Ind AS are largely aligned with the prevailing guidance in IFRS which require classification
of a financial instrument based on substance of the arrangement between the parties rather than
their legal form and the definition of financial asset, financial liability and equity. Further,
recognition and measurement criteria are also driven based on classification of such instruments.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.6
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.2 WHAT ARE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS?
A financial instrument is any contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a
financial liability or equity instrument of another entity.
Here, a contract refers to an agreement between two or more parties that has clear
economic consequences and which parties usually are bound to adhere, usually because
the agreement is enforceable by law.
Contracts need not be in writing and may take a variety of forms.
An important point to note is any assets or liabilities that are not contractual are not
financial liabilities or financial assets. For eg.: income taxes are a statutory obligation and
not arising from contract, constructive obligations as defined in Ind AS 37  Provisions,
Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets do not arise from contracts and hence, are not
financial liabilities, etc.
Financial instruments include:
(a) Primary instruments (such as receivables, payables and equity instruments) and
(b) Derivative financial instruments (such as financial options, futures and forwards,
interest rate swaps and currency swaps).
While the examples above provide an indication of what financial instruments comprise, let's
understand the definition of each of these type of financial instruments in greater detail.
1.3 WHAT IS A FINANCIAL ASSET?
A 'financial asset' is any asset that is:
(a)
Cash;
(b)
An equity instrument of another entity;
(c)
A contractual right:
(i)
to receive cash or another financial asset from another entity; or
(ii)
to exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with another entity under
conditions that are potentially favorable to the entity; or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.7
(d)
a contract that will or may be settled in entity's own equity instruments and is:
(i)
(ii)
a non-derivative for which the entity is or may be obliged to receive a variable
number of entity's own equity instruments; or
a derivative that will or may be settled other than by exchange of fixed amount of
cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of entity's own equity instruments.
For this purpose, entity's own equity instruments do not include puttable financial
instruments classified as equity instruments, instruments that impose on the entity an
obligation to deliver to another party a pro-rata share of net assets of the entity on
liquidation and are classified as equity instruments, or instruments that are
themselves contracts for future receipt or delivery of entity's own equity instruments.
On the basis of the above definition, a financial asset can be either of the following
Financial
asset
Common examples
 Cash
Trade receivables
Investments in bonds and deposits
Investment in equity instruments
Loans receivable, etc.
On the basis of the above definition, some of the key elements to understand:
Cash
*
Currency (cash) is a financial asset because it represents the
medium of exchange and is therefore the basis on which all
transactions are measured and recognised in financial
statements.
A deposit of cash with bank or other financial institution
represents a contractual right of the depositor to obtain cash
from the institution or to draw a cheque or similar instrument
against the balance in favour of a creditor in payment of a
financial liability.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.8
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.9
Physical assets, right-of-use assets and intangible assets
Physical assets (such as inventories, property, plant and equipment), right-of-use
assets and intangible assets (such as patents and trademarks) are not financial
assets.
Control of such physical assets, right-of-use assets and intangible assets creates an
opportunity to generate an inflow of cash or another financial asset, but it does not
give rise to a present right to receive cash or another financial asset.
Prepaid expenses
Assets (such as prepaid expenses) for which the future economic benefit is the
receipt of goods or services, rather than the right to receive cash or another financial
asset, are not financial assets.
Similarly, items such as deferred revenue and most warranty obligations are not
financial liabilities because the outflow of economic benefits associated with them is
the delivery of goods and services rather than a contractual obligation to pay cash or
another financial asset.
'Perpetual' debt instruments
Perpetual debt instruments such as 'perpetual' bonds, debentures and capital notes)
normally provide the holder with the contractual right to receive payments on account of
interest at fixed dates extending into indefinite future, either with no right to receive a return
of principal or a right to a return of principal under terms that make it very unlikely or very
far in the future.
Example 1
Evaluate the financial assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.10
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.11
Illustration 1: Trade receivables
A Ltd. makes sale of goods to customers on credit of 45 days. The customers are entitled to
earn a cash discount @ 2% per annum if payment is made before 45 days and an interest
@ 10% per annum is charged for any payments made after 45 days.
Evaluate whether such trade receivable are financial assets or not.
Solution
A financial asset is an asset where there is a contractual right to receive cash or another financial
asset from another entity.
In the above case, A Ltd. has the contractual right to receive cash /bank from its trade receivable
recorded in its books of accounts, after the expiry of credit period of 45 days or earlier after
passing discounts of 2% per annum.
Hence, trade receivables would meet the definition of financial assets.
It may be noted that contractual right to receive cash includes contractual right to receipt of money
in bank account or any wallet account.
Illustration 2: Deposits
*****
Z Ltd. (the ‘Company') makes sale of goods to customers on credit. Goods are carried in large
containers for delivery to the dealers' destinations. All dealers are required to deposit a fixed
amount of  10,000 as security for the containers, which is returned only when the contract with
Company terminates. The deposits carry 8% per annum which is payable only when the contract
terminates.
If the containers are returned by the dealers in broken condition or any damage caused, then
appropriate adjustments shall be made from the deposits at the time of settlement.
How would such deposits be treated in books of the dealers?
Solution
A financial asset is an asset where there is a contractual right to receive cash or another financial
asset from another entity.
In the above case, such security deposits are receivable in cash at the end of contract period
between the dealer and the Company.
Hence, they meet the definition of financial assets.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.12
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.4 WHAT IS A FINANCIAL LIABILITY?
A financial liability is any liability that is:
(a)
A contractual obligation:
(i)
To deliver cash or other financial asset to another entity; or
(ii)
To exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with another entity under
conditions that are potentially unfavourable to the entity;
Or
(b)
A contract that will or may be settled in entity's own equity instruments and is:
(i)
A non-derivative for which the entity is or may be obliged to deliver a
variable number of entity's own equity instruments; or
(ii)
a derivative that will or may be settled other than by the exchange of a fixed
amount of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of the entity's
own equity instruments.
For this purpose, rights, options or warrants to acquire a fixed number of the entity's
own equity instruments for a fixed amount of any currency are equity instruments if
the entity offers the rights, options or warrants pro rata to all of its existing owners of
the same class of its own non-derivative equity instruments. Also, for these purposes
the entity's own equity instruments do not include puttable financial instruments that
are classified as equity instruments, instruments that impose on the entity an
obligation to deliver to another party a pro rata share of the net assets of the entity
only on liquidation and are classified as equity instruments, or instruments that are
contracts for the future receipt or delivery of the entity's own equity instruments.
As an exception, following type of instruments that meets the definition of a financial
liability may still be classified as an equity instrument if they have certain features
and meets specific conditions in paragraphs 16A and 16B or paragraphs 16C and
16D of Ind AS 32. The definition of financial liability includes a carve-out from IAS
32 that the variablilty due to foreign currency shall be ignored while classifying a
foreign currency convertible bond as equity or liability or compound financial
instrument.
For details, refer Unit 3 - Equity and Financial Liabilities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Financial
liability
Common examples
Loans and borrowings
Payables for purchase of goods & services
11.13
Finance lease liabilities
Redeemable instruments like preference shares, debentures, etc.
Guarantee given for repayment of debt upon borrower's default
Example 2
Illustration 3: Perpetual debt instruments
A Ltd. issues a bond at principal amount of CU 1000 per bond. The terms of bond require
annual payments in perpetuity at a stated interest rate of 8 per cent applied to the principal
amount of CU 1,000. Assuming 8 per cent to be the market rate of interest for the
instrument when it was issued, the issuer assumes a contractual obligation to make a
stream of future interest payments having a fair value (present value) of CU1,000 on initial
recognition.
Evaluate the financial instrument in the hands of both the holder and the issuer.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.14
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
A financial asset is an asset where there is a contractual right to receive cash or another
financial asset from another entity.
For the Holder - There is right to receive cash in future. Hence, it will be classified
as a financial asset
For the Issuer - There is contractual obligation to pay cash in future. However, the
instrument is redeemed at the option of A Ltd. or on liquidation of A Ltd. Therefore,
the instrument has characteristics of both equity and financial liability. Such an
instrument is regarded as compound financial instrument (Ref. para 28 of Ind AS 32).
See Unit 3 to understand accounting for compound financial instrument.
*****
Illustration 4: Creditors for sale of goods
A Ltd. (the 'Company') makes purchase of steel for its consumption in normal course of
business. The purchase terms provide for payment of goods at 30 days credit and
interest payable @ 12% per annum for any delays beyond the credit period.
Analyse whether the transaction leads to any financial instruments and if yes, then what
is the nature of that financial instrument?
Solution
A financial liability is any liability where there is a contractual obligation to deliver cash or
other financial asset to another entity.
In the above case, A Ltd. has entered into a contractual arrangement for purchase of goods
at a fixed consideration payable to the creditor. A contractual arrangement that provides for
payment in fixed amount of cash to another entity meets the definition of financial liability.
*****
Illustration 5: Contract for exchange on unfavorable conditions
A Ltd. (the 'Company') makes a borrowing for INR 10 lacs from RBC Bank, with bullet
repayment of INR 10 lacs and an annual interest rate of 12% per annum. Now, Company
defaults at the end of 5th year and consequently, a rescheduling of the payment schedule
is made beginning 6th year onwards. The Company is required to pay INR 1,300,000 at
the end of 6th year for one time settlement, in lieu of defaults in payments made earlier.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.15
(a)
Does the above instrument meet definition of financial liability? Please explain.
(b)
Analyse the differential amount to be exchanged for one-time settlement.
Solution
(a)
(b)
A Ltd. has entered into an arrangement wherein against the borrowing, A Ltd. has
contractual obligation to make stream of payments (including interest and principal).
This meets definition of financial liability.
Let's compute the amount required to be settled and any differential arising upon one
time settlement at the end of $6^{th}$ year -
*
Loan principal amount $=\mathbb{\times}10,00,000$
Amount payable at the end of $6^{th}ye~ar=\mp12,54,400[10,00,000\times1.12\times1.12$
(Interest for 5th & $6^{th}$ year in default plus principal amount)]
One time settlement $=INR~13,00,000$
Additional amount payable = 45,600
The above represents a contractual obligation to pay cash against settlement of a
financial liability under conditions that are unfavorable to A Ltd. (owing to additional
amount payable in comparison to amount that would have been paid without one
time settlement). Hence the rescheduled arrangement meets definition of 'financial
liability'.
*****
1.5 WHAT IS AN EQUITY INSTRUMENT?
As per Ind AS 32.11 An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual
interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all of its liabilities.
As per Ind AS 32.16 - An instrument is an equity instrument if, and only if, both conditions
(a) and (b) below are met:
(a)
The instrument includes no contractual obligation:
(i)
to deliver cash or another financial asset to another entity; or
(ii)
to exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with another entity under
conditions that are potentially unfavourable to the issuer.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.16
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
If the instrument will or may be settled in the issuer's own equity instruments, it is:
(i)
a non-derivative that includes no contractual obligation for the issuer to
deliver a variable number of its own equity instruments; or
(ii)
a derivative that will be settled only by the issuer exchanging a fixed amount
of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of its own equity
instruments. For this purpose, rights, options or warrants to acquire a fixed
number of the entity's own equity instruments for a fixed amount of any
currency are equity instruments if the entity offers the rights, options or
warrants pro rata to all of its existing owners of the same class of its own non-
derivative equity instruments. Also, for these purposes the issuer's own equity
instruments do not include instruments that have all the features and meet the
conditions described in paragraphs 16A and 16B or paragraphs 16C and 16D,
or instruments that are contracts for the future receipt or delivery of the
issuer's own equity instruments.
A contractual obligation, including one arising from a derivative financial instrument,
that will or may result in the future receipt or delivery of the issuer's own equity
instruments, but does not meet conditions (a) and (b) above, is not an equity
instrument.
Equity
*
*
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Equity instruments issued
Warrants to issue fixed number of shares at
fixed price against each warrant
Other instruments convertible into fixed
number of equity shares for fixed amount
per share, etc.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.17
The key characteristics of an equity instrument have been further explained as follows:
Settlement
in own
equity
instruments
*
Settlement in own equity instruments is equity classified only if
it's a fixed-for-fixed transaction, ie, issue of fixed number of
shares and involves a fixed amount of cash or other financial
asset.
Where an entity enters into a non-derivative contract to issue a
fixed number of its own equity instruments in exchange for a
fixed amount of cash (or another financial asset), it is an equity
instrument of the entity. But this does not apply for instruments
that are equity classified being a puttable instrument or other
instrument entitling the holder to pro-rata share in net assets that
meet specified criteria (refer Unit 3
Equity and Financial
Liabilities).
However, if such a contract contains an obligation for the entity
to pay cash (or another financial asset), it also gives rise to a
liability for the present value of the redemption amount. For
example: a forward contract entered into by an entity to
repurchase fixed number of its own shares for a fixed amount of
cash gives rise to a financial liability to be recorded at present
value of redemption amount.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.18
FINANCIAL REPORTING
An issuer of non-puttable ordinary shares assumes a liability when it formally acts to make
a distribution and becomes legally obliged to the shareholders to do so. This may be the
case following the declaration of a dividend or when the entity is being wound up and any
assets remaining after the satisfaction of liabilities become distributable to shareholders.
Example 3
When a Company proposes dividend in its board meeting, no obligation arises because it
becomes payable only post approval by shareholders in the annual general meeting.
However, when the dividend is approved by shareholders in annual general meeting, the
Company has taken an obligation to distribute dividend to its shareholders and hence it's
a contractual obligation meeting the definition of financial liability.
Examples of equity instruments include:
Non-puttable ordinary shares, for eg.: equity shares issued by companies
Some puttable instruments (if they meet requisite criteria and are not classified as
financial liabilities);
Some instruments that impose on the entity an obligation to deliver to another party
a pro rata share of the net assets of the entity only on liquidation (if they meet
requisite criteria and are not classified as financial liabilities);
Some types of preference shares (where repayment and distribution is at the
discretion of the Issuer);
Warrants or written call options that allow the holder to subscribe for or purchase a
fixed number of non-puttable ordinary shares in the issuing entity in exchange for a
fixed amount of cash or another financial asset.
Basis the above definition of equity and characteristics of such instruments, let's evaluate
some typical form of instruments that may be issued and how are they classified
>
Preference shares
Preference shares is a class of shares issued by Indian companies, whose terms
may provide for redemption at a pre-determined amount with a fixed return which
may be cumulative or discretionary. In determining whether a preference share is a
financial liability or an equity instrument, an issuer assesses the particular rights
attached to the share to determine whether it exhibits the fundamental characteristic
of a financial liability or an equity instrument, as explained in the following table.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.19
(A)
Redeemable preference shares:
(B) Non-redeemable preference shares
Non-redeemable preference shares may be issued by foreign subsidiaries or
foreign branches or foreign associates or foreign joint operations or foreign
joint ventures. In this case, appropriate classification is determined by the
other rights that attach to them. Classification is based on an assessment of
the substance of the contractual arrangements and the definitions of a
financial liability and an equity instrument.
When distributions to holders of the preference shares, whether
cumulative or non-cumulative, are at the discretion of the issuer, the
shares are equity instruments.
The classification of a preference share as an equity instrument or a
financial liability is not affected by, for example:
(a)
a history of making distributions;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.20
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
an intention to make distributions in the future
(c)
a possible negative impact on the price of ordinary shares of the
issuer if distributions are not made (because of restrictions on
paying dividends on the ordinary shares if dividends are not
paid on the preference shares)
(d)
the amount of the issuer's reserves
(e)
an issuer's expectation of a profit or loss for a period; or
(C)
(f)
an ability or inability of the issuer to influence the amount of its
profit or loss for the period.
Hence, the contractual terms determine the nature of instrument. Any
historical trend or ability of the Issuer does not affect the classification
of an instrument as 'equity' or 'financial liability'.
Distributions on preference shares
Other than the terms for redemption of financial instrument, another important
point for consideration is whether the Company has an obligation to make
payments of dividend ie, whether dividend on such preference shares are
cumulative or non-cumulative.
Where dividends are at the discretion of the issuer -this is akin to an
equity instrument. However, where the instrument itself is redeemable,
the obligation to pay still exists but only to the extent of the redemption
value and not dividends on such shares unless they are declared.
Where dividends are cumulative but payable only on liquidation-One
needs to assess the key terms of the instrument to check if the entity
has a contractual obligation:
(a)
(b)
Where no contractual obligation exists to pay- such
preference shares may themselves be irredeemable and the
dividend on such shares even if cumulative, the entity may be
under no obligation to pay unless upon liquidation - then such
preference shares may be classified as equity.
Where contractual obligation exists In cases where the
preference shares are not redeemable, it is like an equity
instrument. But if they are entitled to dividend which is payable
such that entity does not have an unconditional right to defer
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.21
payment, then this provides the shareholders with a lender's
return on the amount invested. This obligation is also not
negated if the entity is unable to pay such dividend for lack of
funds or insufficient distributable profits. Therefore, the
obligation to pay dividend meets the definition of financial
liability. The instrument in such cases shall have two
components financial liability represented by dividend and
equity component represented by the issue price, such
instruments are overall classified as 'compound financial
instruments' and each of the components as mentioned above
are accounted separately.
Illustration 6: Preference shares with non-cumulative dividend
Silver Ltd. issued irredeemable preference shares with face value of 10 each and premium of
90. These shares carry dividend @ 8% per annum, however dividend is paid only when Silver
Ltd declares dividend on equity shares. Analyse the nature of this instrument.
Solution
In the above case, two main characteristics of the preference shares are:
(i)
(ii)
Preference shares carry dividend, which is payable only when Company declares dividend
on equity shares
Preference share are irredeemable.
Analysing the definition of equity, an instrument meets definition of equity if:
(a)
It contains no contractual obligation to pay cash; and
(b)
Where an instrument shall be settled in own equity instruments, it's a non-derivative
contract that will be settled only by issue of fixed number of shares or a derivative contract
that will be settled by issue of fixed number of shares for a fixed amount of cash.
In the above instrument, there is no contractual obligation on the Company to pay cash since
(i)
Face value is not redeemable (except in case of liquidation); and
(ii)
Dividend is payable only if Company declares dividend on equity shares. Since dividend on
equity shares is discretionary and the Company can choose not to pay, Company has an
unconditional right to avoid payment of cash on preference shares also.
Hence preference shares meet definition of equity instrument.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.22
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Contracts settled in own equity instruments but classified as 'financial liability'
(where equity instrument is treated as currency) -
Illustration 7: Non-derivative contract to be settled in own equity instruments
A Ltd. invests in compulsorily convertible preference shares (CCPS) issued by its subsidiary
B Ltd. at  1,000 each (10 face value + 990 premium). Under the terms of the instrument,
each CCPS is compulsorily convertible into one equity share of B Ltd at the end of 5 years.
Such CCPS carry dividend @ 12% per annum, payable only when declared at the discretion of
B Ltd. Evaluate this under definition of financial instrument.
Solution
B Ltd. has issued CCPS which provide for -
(a)
Conversion into fixed number of equity shares, ie, one equity share for every CCPS
(b)
Non-cumulative dividends.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.23
Applying the definition of 'equity' under Ind AS 32 -
(a)
(b)
There is no contractual obligation to deliver cash or other financial asset. Dividends are
payable only when declared and hence, at the discretion of the Issuer B Ltd., thereby
resulting in no contractual obligation over B Ltd.
Conversion is into a fixed number of equity shares.
Hence, it meets definition of equity instrument and shall be classified as such in books of B Ltd.
*****
Illustration 8: Settlement in variable number of shares
Target Ltd. took a borrowing from Z Ltd. for  10,00,000. Z Ltd. enters into an arrangement with
Target Ltd. for settlement of the loan against issue of a certain number of equity shares of
Target Ltd. whose value equals 10,00,000. For this purpose, fair value per share (to determine
total number of equity shares to be issued) shall be determined based on the market price of the
shares of Target Ltd. at a future date, upon settlement of the contract. Evaluate this under
definition of financial instrument.
Solution
In the above scenario, Target Ltd. is under an obligation to issue variable number of equity shares
equal to a total consideration of ₹10,00,000. Hence equity shares are used as currency for
purpose of settlement of an amount payable by Target Ltd.
Since this is variable number of shares to be issued in a non-derivative contract for fixed amount
of cash, it tantamounts to use of equity shares as 'currency' and hence this contract meets the
definition of financial liability in books of Target Ltd.
*****
1.6 COMPARISON OF FINANCIAL ASSETS, FINANCIAL
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.24
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.7 SCOPE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Scope of financial instruments excludes the following:
(a)
Interests in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures that are accounted for in accordance
with Ind AS 110 Consolidated Financial Statements, Ind AS 27 Separate Financial
Statements or Ind AS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures. However, in some
cases, Ind AS 110, Ind AS 27 or Ind AS 28 require or permit an entity to account for an
interest in a subsidiary, associate or joint venture in accordance with some or all of the
requirements of this Standard. Entities shall also apply this Standard to derivatives on an
interest in a subsidiary, associate or joint venture unless the derivative meets the definition
of an equity instrument of the entity in Ind AS 32 Financial Instruments: Presentation.
(b) Rights and obligations under leases to which Ind AS 116 Leases applies. However,
(i) finance lease receivables (i.e. net investments in finance leases) and operating lease
receivables recognised by a lessor are subject to the derecognition and impairment
requirements of Ind AS 109;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.25
(c)
(d)
(ii)
(iii)
lease liabilities recognised by a lessee are subject to the derecognition requirements
in paragraph 3.3.1 of Ind AS 109; and
derivatives that are embedded in leases are subject to the embedded derivatives
requirements of Ind AS 109.
employers' rights and obligations under employee benefit plans, to which Ind AS 19
Employee Benefits applies.
rights and obligations arising under (i) an insurance contract as defined in Ind AS 117
Insurance Contracts, other than an issuer's rights and obligations arising under an
insurance contract that meets the definition of a financial guarantee contract, or (ii) a
contract that is within the scope of Ind AS 117 because it contains a discretionary
participation feature.
However, this Standard applies to a derivatives that are embedded in contracts
within the scope of Ind AS 117 if the derivatives are not itself contracts within the
scope of Ind AS 117.
This standard applies to investment components that are separated from
contracts within the scope of Ind AS 117, if Ind AS 117 requires such
separation, unless the separated investment component is an investment
contract with discretionary participation features within the scope of Ind AS
117.
Moreover, if an issuer of financial guarantee contracts has previously asserted
explicitly that it regards such contracts as insurance contracts and has used
accounting that is applicable to insurance contracts, the issuer may elect to apply
either this Standard or Ind AS 117 to such financial guarantee contracts. The issuer
may make that election contract by contract, but the election for each contract is
irrevocable.
This standard applies to an entity's rights and obligations that are financial
instruments arising under credit card contracts, or similar contracts that
provide credit or payment arrangements, that an entity issues that meet the
definition of an insurance contract but which Ind AS 117 excludes from the
scope of Ind AS 117. However, if, and only if, the insurance coverage is a
contractual term of such a financial instrument, the entity shall separate that
component and apply Ind AS 117 to it.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.26
FINANCIAL REPORTING
This standard applies to an entity's rights and obligations that are financial
instruments arising under insurance contracts that an entity issues that limit
the compensation for insured events to the amount otherwise required to settle
the policyholder's obligation created by the contract, if the entity elects, in
accordance with Ind AS 117, to apply Ind AS 109 instead of Ind AS 117 to such
contracts.
(e) Any forward contract between an acquirer and a selling shareholder to buy or sell an
acquiree that will result in a business combination within the scope of Ind AS 103 Business
Combinations at a future acquisition date. The term of the forward contract should not
exceed a reasonable period normally necessary to obtain any required approvals and to
complete the transaction.
(f)
(g)
(h)
Loan commitments other than those loan commitments described below -
loan commitments that the entity designates as financial liabilities at fair value
through profit or loss. An entity that has a past practice of selling the assets resulting
from its loan commitments shortly after origination shall apply this Standard to all its
loan commitments in the same class.
loan commitments that can be settled net in cash or by delivering or issuing another
financial instrument. These loan commitments are derivatives. A loan commitment is
not regarded as settled net merely because the loan is paid out in instalments (for
example, a mortgage construction loan that is paid out in instalments in line with the
progress of construction).
commitments to provide a loan at a below-market interest rate
However, an issuer of loan commitments shall apply the impairment requirements of this
Standard to loan commitments that are not otherwise within the scope of this Standard.
Also, all loan commitments are subject to the derecognition requirements of this Standard.
Financial instruments, contracts and obligations under share-based payment transactions to
which Ind AS 102 Share-based Payment applies, except for contracts to buy non-financial
items as described below.
Rights to payments to reimburse the entity for expenditure that it is required to make to
settle a liability that it recognises as a provision in accordance with Ind AS 37 Provisions,
Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets, or for which, in an earlier period, it recognised
a provision in accordance with Ind AS 37.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.27
(i) Rights and obligations within the scope of Ind AS 115 Revenue from Contracts with
Customers that are financial instruments, except for those that Ind AS 115 specifies are
accounted for in accordance with this Standard.
Summary of the transaction outside the scope Financial Instruments:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.28
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1.8 CONTRACTS TO BUY OR SELL NON-FINANCIAL
ITEMS ( OWN USE EXEMPTION')
Contracts to buy or sell non-financial items are outside the scope of 'financial instruments',
except for the following:
(a) Contracts to buy or sell a non-financial item that can be settled net in cash or
another financial instrument, or by exchanging financial instruments, as if the
contracts were financial instruments, with the exception of contracts that were
entered into and continue to be held for the purpose of the receipt or delivery of a
non-financial item in accordance with the entity's expected purchase, sale or usage
requirements.
(b)
(c)
A contract to buy or sell a non-financial item that can be settled net in cash or
another financial instrument, or by exchanging financial instruments that are
irrevocably designated as measured at fair value through profit or loss (even if it was
entered into for the purpose of the receipt or delivery of a non-financial item in
accordance with the entity's expected purchase, sale or usage requirements). This
designation is available only at inception of the contract and only if it eliminates or
significantly reduces a recognition inconsistency (sometimes referred to as an
'accounting mismatch') that would otherwise arise from not recognising that contract
because it is excluded from the scope of this Standard applying the scope exclusion
in (a) above.
A written option to buy or sell a non-financial item that can be settled net in cash or
another financial instrument, or by exchanging financial instruments, where such a
contract was not entered into for the purpose of receipt or delivery of the non-
financial item in accordance with entity's expected purchase, sale or usage
requirements.
There are various ways in which a contract to buy or sell non-financial items can be settled
net in cash or another financial instrument or by exchanging financial instruments. These
include:
(a)
(b)
when the terms of the contract permit either party to settle it net in cash or another
financial instrument or by exchanging financial instruments;
when the ability to settle net in cash or another financial instrument, or by exchanging
financial instruments, is not explicit in the terms of the contract, but the entity has a
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.29
(c)
(d)
Example 4
practice of settling similar contracts net in cash or another financial instrument or by
exchanging financial instruments (whether with the counterparty, by entering into
offsetting contracts or by selling the contract before its exercise or lapse);
when, for similar contracts, the entity has a practice of taking delivery of the underlying
and selling it within a short period after delivery for the purpose of generating a profit
from short-term fluctuations in price or dealer's margin; and
when the non-financial item that is the subject of the contract is readily convertible to
cash.
ABC Ltd. enters into a contract to buy 100 tonnes of cocoa beans at 1,000 per tonne for delivery
in 12 months. On the settlement date, the market price for cocoa beans is 1,500 per tonne. If the
contract cannot be settled net in cash and this contract is entered for delivery of cocoa beans in
line with ABC Ltd.'s expected purchase/ usage requirements, then own-use exemption applies.
In such case, the contract is considered to be an executory contract outside the scope of
Ind AS 109 and hence shall not be accounted as a derivative.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
