11.30
FINANCIAL REPORTING
UNIT 2:
CLASSIFICATION AND MEASUREMENT OF FINANCIAL
ASSETS AND FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
2.1 RECOGNITION AND SUBSEQUENT MEASUREMENT
All financial assets and financial liabilities are measured at their fair values upon initial recognition.
Classification of the financial assets and financial liabilities drives their initial and subsequent
measurement.
2.2 FINANCIAL ASSETS: KEY ELEMENTS TO DETERMINE
CLASSIFICATION
Key essential elements that determine classification of financial assets are:
(A)
Business model (BM) test:
An entity's business model refers to how an entity manages its financial assets in
order to generate cash flows.
Factors
determining
BM
*
An entity's business model for managing financial assets is a matter of fact
and not merely an assertion. It is typically observable through the activities
that the entity undertakes to achieve the objective of the business model
and an entity will need to use judgement when it assesses its business
model for managing financial assets.
This assessment is not determined by a single factor or activity. Instead,
the entity must consider all relevant evidence that is available. Such
relevant evidence includes, but is not limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
how the performance of business model and the financial assets
held within that business model are evaluated & reported to the
entity's key management personnel;
the risks that affect the performance of the business model (and
the financial assets held within that business model) and, in
particular, the way in which those risks are managed; and
how managers of the business are compensated (for example,
whether the compensation is based on the fair value of the assets
managed or on the contractual cash flows collected).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.31
Level of
aggregation
of assets
for
determining
BM
Determining
basis of
realisation
of
contractual
cash flows
Difference
in actual
realisation
from BM
An entity's business model is determined at a level that
reflects how groups of financial assets are managed together
to achieve a particular business objective and not based on
management's intentions for an individual instrument.
Accordingly, this condition is not an instrument-by-instrument
approach to classification and should be determined at a
higher level of aggregation.
However, a single entity may have more than one business
model for managing its financial instruments. Consequently,
classification need not be determined at the reporting entity
level. For example, an entity may hold a portfolio of
investments that it manages in order to collect contractual
cash flows and another portfolio of investments that it
manages in order to trade to realise fair value changes.
Entity's business model determines whether cash flows will
result from collecting contractual cash flows, selling financial
assets or both. Consequently, this assessment is not
performed on the basis of scenarios that the entity does not
reasonably expect to occur, such as so-called 'worst case' or
'stress case' scenarios.
For example, if an entity expects that it will sell a particular
portfolio of financial assets only in a stress case scenario, that
scenario would not affect the entity's assessment of the
business model for those assets if the entity reasonably
expects that such a scenario will not occur.
If cash flows are realised in a way that is different from the entity's
expectations at the date that the entity assessed the business model
(for example, if the entity sells more or fewer financial assets than it
expected when it classified the assets), that does not give rise to a
prior period error in the entity's financial statements nor does it
change the classification of the remaining financial assets held in
that business model (ie those assets that the entity recognised in
prior periods and still holds) as long as the entity considered all
relevant information that was available at the time that it made the
business model assessment.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.32
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Financial assets held for trading:
Financial assets held for trading are defined as those that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
are acquired or incurred principally for the purpose of sale or repurchase in
the near term;
on initial recognition are part of a portfolio of identified financial instruments
that are managed together and for which there is evidence of a recent actual
pattern of short-term profit-taking; or
are derivatives (except for those that are financial guarantee contracts or are
designated effective hedging instruments).
Trading generally reflects active and frequent buying and selling, and financial
instruments held for trading are normally used with the objective of generating a
profit from short-term fluctuations in price or a dealer's margin.
Illustration 1
An entity holds investments to collect their contractual cash flows. The funding
needs of the entity are predictable and the maturity of its financial assets is
matched to the entity's estimated funding needs.
The entity performs credit risk management activities with the objective of
minimising credit losses. In the past, sales have typically occurred when the
financial assets' credit risk has increased such that the assets no longer meet the
credit criteria specified in the entity's documented investment policy. In addition,
infrequent sales have occurred as a result of unanticipated funding needs.
Reports to key management personnel focus on the credit quality of the financial
assets and the contractual return. The entity also monitors fair values of the
financial assets, among other information.
Evaluate the business model.
Solution
Although the entity considers, among other information, the financial assets'
fair values from a liquidity perspective (ie the cash amount that would be
realised if the entity needs to sell assets), the entity's objective is to hold the
financial assets in order to collect the contractual cash flows.
Sales would not contradict that objective if they were in response to an
increase in the assets' credit risk, for example if the assets no longer meet the
credit criteria specified in the entity's documented investment policy.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.33
Infrequent sales resulting from unanticipated funding needs (eg in a stress
case scenario) also would not contradict that objective, even if such sales are
significant in value.
Hence the business model of the company is to collect contractual cash flows and
not realisation from sale of financial assets.
*****
Illustration 2
An entity's business model is to purchase portfolios of financial assets, such as
loans. Those portfolios may or may not include financial assets that are credit
impaired.
If payment on the loans is not made on a timely basis, the entity attempts to realise
the contractual cash flows through various means-for example, by contacting the
debtor by mail, telephone or other methods. The entity's objective is to collect the
contractual cash flows and the entity does not manage any of the loans in this
portfolio with an objective of realising cash flows by selling them.
In some cases, the entity enters into interest rate swaps to change the interest rate
on particular financial assets in a portfolio from a floating interest rate to a fixed
interest rate.
Evaluate the business model.
Solution
The objective of the entity's business model is to hold the financial assets in order to
collect the contractual cash flows. The same analysis would apply even if the entity
does not expect to receive all of the contractual cash flows (eg some of the financial
assets are credit impaired at initial recognition).
Moreover, the fact that the entity enters into derivatives to modify the cash flows of
the portfolio does not in itself change the entity's business model.
*****
Illustration 3
Entity B sells goods to customers on credit. Entity B typically offers customers up
to 60 days following the delivery of goods to make payment in full. Entity B
collects cash in accordance with the contractual cash flows of trade receivables
and has no intention to dispose of the receivables.
Evaluate the business model.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.34
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
Entity's B objective is to collect contractual cash flows from trade receivables and
therefore, trade receivables meet the business model test for the purpose of
classifying the financial assets at amortised cost.
*****
Illustration 4
An entity anticipates capital expenditure in a few years. The entity invests its
excess cash in short and long-term financial assets so that it can fund the
expenditure when the need arises. Many of the financial assets have contractual
lives that exceed the entity's anticipated investment period.
The entity will hold financial assets to collect the contractual cash flows and, when
an opportunity arises, it will sell financial assets to re-invest the cash in financial
assets with a higher return. The managers responsible for the portfolio are
remunerated based on the overall return generated by the portfolio.
Evaluate the business model.
Solution
The objective of the business model is achieved by both collecting contractual
cash flows and selling financial assets. The entity will make decisions on an
ongoing basis about whether collecting contractual cash flows or selling financial
assets will maximise the return on the portfolio until the need arises for the
invested cash.
In contrast, consider an entity that anticipates a cash outflow in five years to fund
capital expenditure and invests excess cash in short-term financial assets. When
the investments mature, the entity reinvests the cash in new short-term financial
assets. The entity maintains this strategy until the funds are needed, at which time
the entity uses the proceeds from the maturing financial assets to fund the capital
expenditure. Only sales that are insignificant in value occur before maturity (unless
there is an increase in credit risk). The objective of this contrasting business model
is to hold financial assets to collect contractual cash flows.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.35
Illustration 5
An entity has a business model with the objective of originating loans to customers
and subsequently selling those loans to a securitisation vehicle. The securitisation
vehicle issues instruments to investors. The originating entity controls the
securitisation vehicle and thus consolidates it.
The securitisation vehicle collects the contractual cash flows from the loans and
passes them on to its investors. In the consolidated balance sheet, loans continue
to be recognised because they are not derecognised by the securitisation vehicle.
Evaluate the business model.
Solution
The entity originating loans to customers has the objective of realising contractual
cash flows on the loan portfolio only through sale to securitisation vehicle.
However, the consolidated group originates loans with the objective of holding
them to collect the contractual cash flows.
Hence, the consolidated financial statements provide for a business model
with the objective of collecting contractual cash flows by holding to maturity.
And in separate financial statements of the entity originating loans to
customers, business model is to collect cash flows through sale only.
*****
Illustration 6
A financial institution holds financial assets to meet liquidity needs in a 'stress
case' scenario (eg, a run on the bank's deposits). The entity does not anticipate
selling these assets except in such scenarios. The entity monitors the credit
quality of the financial assets and its objective in managing the financial assets is
to collect the contractual cash flows. The entity evaluates the performance of the
assets on the basis of interest revenue earned and credit losses realised.
However, the entity also monitors the fair value of the financial assets from a
liquidity perspective to ensure that the cash amount that would be realised if the
entity needed to sell the assets in a stress case scenario would be sufficient to
meet the entity's liquidity needs. Periodically, the entity makes sales that are
insignificant in value to demonstrate liquidity.
Evaluate the business model.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.36
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
The objective of the entity's business model is to hold the financial assets to collect
contractual cash flows. The analysis would not change
If during a previous stress case scenario the entity had sales that were
significant in value in order to meet its liquidity needs; or
Recurring sales activity that is insignificant in value is not inconsistent with
holding financial assets to collect contractual cash flows.
If the entity is required by its regulator to routinely sell financial assets to
demonstrate that the assets are liquid, and the value of the assets sold is
significant, the entity's business model is not to hold financial assets to collect
contractual cash flows. Whether a third party imposes the requirement to sell the
financial assets, or that activity is at the entity's discretion, is not relevant to the
analysis.
In contrast, if an entity holds financial assets to meet its everyday liquidity needs
and meeting that objective involves frequent sales that are significant in value, the
objective of the entity's business model is not to hold the financial assets to collect
contractual cash flows.
*****
(B)
Contractual cash flows characteristics test:
Ind AS 109 requires an entity to classify a financial asset on the basis of its contractual
cash flow characteristics if the financial asset is held
(i)
(ii)
within a business model whose objective is to hold assets to collect contractual cash
flows; or
within a business model whose objective is achieved by both collecting contractual
cash flows and selling financial assets.
To do so, an entity is required to determine whether the asset's contractual cash
flows are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount
outstanding for the currency in which the financial asset is denominated.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.37
The key characteristics of cash flows to test if they are solely payments of principal
and interest are as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.38
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Following are examples of contractual terms that result in contractual cash flows
that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount
outstanding:
(a) a variable interest rate on a financial instrument, where this rate consists of
consideration for -
(b)
☐
time value of money,
credit risk associated with the principal amount outstanding during a
particular period of time (the consideration for credit risk may be
determined at initial recognition only, and so may be fixed); and
other basic lending risks and costs, as well as a profit margin.
This is because this variable interest rate is only to provide the lender with a
return through 'interest' based on present market factors and no other form of
return on the principal amount of the financial instrument. So, it has
characteristics of return similar to one on a basic lending arrangement and
thus, meets definition of contractual cash flows that are solely payments of
principal and interest.
a contractual term that permits the issuer (ie the debtor) to prepay a debt
instrument or permits the holder (ie the creditor) to put a debt instrument back
to the issuer before maturity and the prepayment amount substantially
represents unpaid amounts of principal and interest on the principal amount
outstanding, which may include reasonable additional compensation for the
early termination of the contract;
Reasonable additional compensation' implies that the party choosing to
exercise its option to terminate the contract compensates the other party.
Exception
Some prepayment options could result in other party being forced to accept
negative compensation e.g. the lender receives an amount less than the
unpaid amounts of principal and interest if the borrower chooses to prepay.
Earlier, these instruments were measured at FVTPL. However, now after
amendment, such financial assets could be measured at amortised cost or at
FVOCI if they meet the other relevant requirements of Ind AS 109.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
(c)
11.39
To be eligible for the exception, the fair value of the prepayment feature would
have to be insignificant on initial recognition of the asset. If this is
impracticable to assess based on the facts and circumstances that existed on
initial recognition of the asset, then the exception would not be available.
Also, financial assets prepayable at current fair value would be measured at
FVTPL. The same would apply if the prepayment amount includes the fair
value cost to terminate a hedging instrument if the amount is inconsistent with
the current Ind AS 109 prepayment rules. (The measurement principles given
here have been explained in detail in the subsequent sections).
a contractual term that permits the issuer or the holder to extend the
contractual term of a debt instrument (ie an extension option) and the terms of
the extension option result in contractual cash flows during the extension
period that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal
amount outstanding, which may include reasonable additional compensation
for the extension of the contract.
Illustration 7
Instrument A is a bond with a stated maturity date. Payments of principal and
interest on the principal amount outstanding are linked to an inflation index of the
currency in which the instrument is issued. The inflation link is not leveraged and
the principal is protected.
Evaluate the Contractual cash flows characteristics test
Solution
The contractual cash flows are solely payments of principal and interest on the
principal amount outstanding. Linking payments of principal and interest on the
principal amount outstanding to an unleveraged inflation index resets the time
value of money to a current level. In other words, the interest rate on the
instrument reflects 'real' interest. Thus, the interest amounts are consideration for
the time value of money on the principal amount outstanding.
However, if the interest payments were indexed to another variable such as the
debtor's performance (eg the debtor's net income) or an equity index, the
contractual cash flows are not payments of principal and interest on the principal
amount outstanding (unless the indexing to the debtor's performance results in an
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.40
FINANCIAL REPORTING
adjustment that only compensates the holder for changes in the credit risk of the
instrument, such that contractual cash flows are solely payments of principal and
interest). That is because the contractual cash flows reflect a return that is
inconsistent with a basic lending arrangement.
*****
Illustration 8
Instrument F is a bond that is convertible into a fixed number of equity instruments
of the issuer. Analyse the nature of cash flows.
Solution
The holder would analyse the convertible bond in its entirety. The contractual cash
flows are not payments of principal and interest on the principal amount
outstanding because they reflect a return that is inconsistent with a basic lending
arrangement; ie the return is linked to the value of the equity of the issuer.
*****
Illustration 9
Instrument H is a perpetual instrument but the issuer may call the instrument at
any point and pay the holder the par amount plus accrued interest due.
Instrument H pays a market interest rate but payment of interest cannot be made
unless the issuer is able to remain solvent immediately afterwards. Deferred
interest does not accrue additional interest. Analyse the nature of cash flows.
Solution
The contractual cash flows are not payments of principal and interest on the
principal amount outstanding. That is because the issuer may be required to defer
interest payments and additional interest does not accrue on those deferred
interest amounts. As a result, interest amounts are not consideration for the time
value of money on the principal amount outstanding.
If interest accrued on the deferred amounts, the contractual cash flows could be
payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.41
Illustration 10
Instrument D is loan with recourse and is secured by collateral. Does the collateral
affect the nature of contractual cash flows?
Solution
The fact that a loan is collateralised (since with recourse) does not in itself affect the
analysis of whether the contractual cash flows are solely payments of principal and
interest on the principal amount outstanding. The collateral is only a security to
recover dues.
*****
Illustration 11
Instrument G is a loan that pays an inverse floating interest rate (ie the interest rate
has an inverse relationship to market interest rates). Analyse the nature of cash
flows.
Solution
Here, interest on the instrument has an inverse relationship to the market rate of
interest. Hence, it is unlike a basic lending arrangement which normally comprises of
interest payable on any funds lent, as a consideration for the time value of money,
credit risk and profit margin normally existing in such arrangements. This
arrangement with an inverse floating interest rate provides the lender with a return
which may be higher or lower to the market rate of interest and hence, is not
necessarily a consideration for the time value of money on the principal amount
outstanding.
Thus, these do not represent contractual cash flows that are solely payments of
principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.
*****
2.3 FINANCIAL ASSETS: CLASSIFICATION
CONCEPT
OVERALL
Categorisation of financial assets (FA) is determined based on the business model that determines
how cash flows of the financial asset are collected and the contractual cash flow characteristics;
and can be:
(a)
Measured at Amortised cost
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(b)
(c)
11.42
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Measured at fair value through comprehensive income (FVOCI)
Measured at fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL).
As per Ind AS 109.4.1.1 - Except for financial assets designated as fair value through profit
or loss (refer Ind AS 109.4.1.5), an entity shall classify financial assets as subsequently
measured at amortised cost, fair value through other comprehensive income or fair value
through profit or loss on the basis of both:
(a)
(b)
Entity's business model (BM) for managing the financial assets and
Contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial asset.
Categorisation of financial assets has been broadly laid out in the below flow chart:
Financial Assets measured at
Amortised cost
Fair value through Other
Comprehensive Income
Fair value through
profit or loss
If below conditions are met:
(a) FA is held within BM whose
objective is to hold financial assets in
order to collect contractual cash flows
(b) Contractual terms give rise on
specified dates to cash flows that are
solely payments of principal and interest
on the principal amount outstanding.
FA are accounted at FVTPL if:
(a) Any asset which is not measured at
amortised cost and not measured
at FVOCI; or
(b) If on initial recognition, any asset
may irrevocably be designated as
FVTPL if specific criteria met.
FA shall be measured at FVOCI if below conditions are met:
(a)
(b)
FA is held within BM whose objective is achieved both by collecting
contractual cash flows and selling FA
Contractual terms give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are
solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount
outstanding
Equity instruments that are not held for trading and contingent consideration in
business combination for which the entity makes an irrevocable election, on
initial recognition, to carry at fair value through OCI
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.43
Exception to classification based on above criteria mentioned in para 109.4.1.1
Option to designate at fair value through profit or loss:
An entity may, at initial recognition, irrevocably designate a financial asset as measured at
fair value through profit or loss if doing so eliminates or significantly reduces a
measurement or recognition inconsistency (sometimes referred to as an 'accounting
mismatch') that would otherwise arise from measuring assets or liabilities or recognising
the gains and losses on them on different bases
The decision of an entity to designate a financial asset or financial liability as at fair
value through profit or loss is similar to an accounting policy choice (although, unlike
an accounting policy choice, it is not required to be applied consistently to all similar
transactions). When an entity has such a choice, paragraph 14(b) of IAS 8 requires the
chosen policy to result in the financial statements providing reliable and more relevant
information about the effects of transactions, other events and conditions on the entity's
financial position, financial performance or cash flows.
Financial Assets
Amortized Cost
SPPI
Business
Or
Model Test + Contractual
- To collect
cash flow
test
Fair Value through other
comprehensive income
(FVTOCI)
Fair Value through
profit or loss (FVTPL)
Business
Model Test
To collect and
- To sell
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
SPPI
Or
Contractual
Held for
trading
Residual
category
cash flow test
11.44
FINANCIAL REPORTING
1. Financial Assets at Amortised cost
What is Amortised cost
Amortised cost is the amount at which the financial asset is measured at
initial recognition minus the principal repayments, plus or minus the
cumulative amortisation using the effective interest method of any
difference between that initial amount and the maturity amount and, for
financial assets, adjusted for any loss allowance.
In applying effective interest method -
(a)
(b)
Entity identifies fees that are an integral part of the effective interest rate of a
financial instrument. Fees that are an integral part of the effective interest rate
of a financial instrument are treated as an adjustment to the effective interest
rate, unless the financial instrument is measured at fair value, with the change
in fair value being recognised in profit or loss. In those cases, the fees are
recognised as revenue or expense when the instrument is initially recognised.
Such fees adjusted in effective interest rate are then amortised over then
expected life of the instrument. However, a shorter period may be used if such
fee adjusted in effective interest rate pertains to such shorter period.
Financial asset (FA) shall be classified at amortised cost if it meets both of
following criteria:
1.
2.
'Hold-to-collect' business model test Objective is to hold the financial
asset in order to collect contractual cash flows;
AND
'SPPI' contractual cash flow characteristics test Contractual terms give
rise to cash flows that are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest (SPPI)
on the principal amount outstanding.
Examples of Financial assets classified and accounted for at amortised cost:
Trade receivables
Investments in government bonds (not held for trading)
Investments in term deposits (at standard interest rates)
*
Loan receivables with 'basic' features
Investment in Equity instrument can never be classified at amortized cost.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.45
Illustration 12: Hold-to-collect' business model test
An entity purchased a debt instrument for 1,00,000.
The instrument pays interest of 6,000 annually and has 10 years to maturity when purchased.
The entity intends to hold the asset to collect the contractual cash flows.
Evaluate the business model test.
Solution
Entity's objective is to hold the asset to collect the contractual cash flows and not to sell the assets
before the maturity period.
Thus, the debt instrument would meet the 'hold-to-collect' business model test.
*****
Illustration 13: Hold-to-collect' business model test
An entity purchased a debt instrument for 1,00,000.
The instrument pays interest of 6,000 annually and has 10 years to maturity when purchased.
The entity intends to hold the asset to collect the contractual cash flows.
Six years have passed and the entity is suffering a liquidity crisis and needs to sell the asset to
raise funds.
Evaluate the business model test.
Solution
Since the sale of financial assets was not expected on initial classification and therefore, does not
affect the classification (i.e. there is no retrospective reclassification).
Thus, the debt instrument would still meet the 'hold-to-collect' business model test.
*****
Illustration 14: SPPI or contractual cash flow test
SPPI test for loan with zero interest and no fixed repayment terms
Parent H Ltd. provides a loan to its Subsidiary S Ltd. The loan is classified as a current liability
in Subsidiary S's financial statements and has the following terms:
Interest free loan.
No fixed repayment terms
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.46
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Repayable on demand of Parent H Ltd.
Does the loan meet the 'SPPI' or contractual cash flows characteristic test?
Solution
Yes. The terms for the repayment of the principal amount of the loan on demand satisfies the
criterion of SPPI.
*****
Illustration 15: SPPI Test for loan with zero interest repayable in ten years
Parent H Ltd. provides a loan of INR 100 million to Subsidiary B. The loan has the following
terms:
No interest
Repayable in ten years.
Does the loan meet the 'SPPI' or contractual cash flows characteristic test?
Solution
Yes. The terms for the repayment of the principal amount of the loan in 10 years satisfies the
criterion of SPPI.
*****
Illustration 16: SPPI Test for loan with interest rate
Entity A Ltd. lends Entity B Ltd. INR 5 million for ten years, subject to the following terms:
Interest is based on the prevailing variable market interest rate.
Variable interest rate is capped at 10%.
Repayable in ten years.
Does the loan meet the 'SPPI' or contractual cash flows characteristic test?
Solution
Contractual cash flows of both a fixed rate instrument and a floating rate instrument are payments
of principal and interest as long as the interest reflects consideration for the time value of money
and credit risk.
Therefore, a loan that contains a combination of a fixed and variable interest rate meets the
contractual cash flow characteristics test.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Illustration 17: Trade receivables - Amortised cost
11.47
H Ltd. makes sale of goods to customers on credit of 60 days. The customers are entitled to earn
a cash discount @ 5% per annum if payment is made before 60 days and an interest
@12% per annum is charged for any payments made after 60 days. Company does not have a
policy of selling its debtors and holds them to collect contractual cash flows.
Evaluate the financial instrument.
Solution
In the above case, since H Ltd. has a contractual right to receive cash flows from its customers
and therefore such trade receivable are financial assets for H Ltd.
Further, H Ltd. business model test to collect will satisfy as the objective is to hold its trade
receivable to collect contractual cash flows till the end of maturity period and such trade receivable
recorded in books represents contractual cash flows that are solely payments of principal and
interest if paid beyond credit period.
Hence such trade receivables are classified at amortised cost.
*****
Illustration 18: Security Deposits - Amortized Costs
A Ltd. (the  Company') has obtained the premises from B Ltd. on lease to carry on its business.
The lease contract period is 5 years. As per the lease agreement, A Ltd. has paid security deposits
to B Ltd. amounting to 10 Lac which is refundable after the expiry of lease agreement.
How would such deposits be treated in books of the A Ltd. ?
Solution
In the above case, since A Ltd. has a contractual right to receive cash flows from its Lessor,
B Ltd. and therefore such security deposits receivable are financial assets for A Ltd.
Further, A Ltd. business model test to collect will be satisfied as the objective is to hold its security
deposits receivable to collect contractual cash flows till the end of maturity period. And such trade
receivable recorded in books represents contractual cash flows that are solely payments of
principal and interest.
Hence such security deposits receivables are classified at amortised cost.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.48
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Financial Assets at Fair Value at Other Comprehensive Income
2.
A.
*
Accounting for debt instruments when it is classified as FVOCI
Financial asset (FA) is measured at fair value through OCI (FVOCI) if it
meets both of following criteria:
1.
2.
Objective is
'Hold-to-collect and sell' business model test
achieved by both holding the financial asset in order to collect
contractual cash flows and selling the financial asset i.e. Intention of
the entity is to sell the instrument before the investment matures.
AND
'SPPI' contractual cash flow characteristics test - Contractual terms
give rise to cash flows that are Solely Payments of Principal and
Interest (SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding.
Examples of FA classified and accounted for at FVOCI:
Investments in government bonds where the investment period is likely
to be shorter than its maturity period.
Investments in corporate bonds where the investment period is likely to
be shorter than its maturity period.
Illustration 19: Hold-to-collect' or 'hold-to-collect & sell' business model test
Entity A has surplus funds  INR 50 million
A has not yet found suitable investment opportunity so it buys medium dated (5
year maturity) high quality government bonds in order to generate interest income.
If a suitable investment opportunity arises before the maturity date, the entity will
sell the bonds and use the proceeds for the acquisition of a business operation. It
is likely that a suitable business opportunity will be found before maturity date.
Whether the investment opportunity will meet the 'hold-to-collect or  hold-to-collect
& sell business model test?
Solution
Government bonds would not meet the 'hold-to-collect' business model test
because it is considered likely that the bonds will be sold well before their
contractual maturity.
However, it is likely that such investment would meet the 'hold-to-collect and sell'
business model test.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
B.
Equity instrument when it is classified as FVOCI
11.49
*
*
*
Ind AS 109 requires all equity investments to be measured at fair value. The
default approach is that all changes in fair value of instruments to be
recognised in profit or loss.
However, for equity investments that are not held for trading, entities can
make an irrevocable election at initial recognition to classify the instruments
as at FVOCI, with all subsequent changes in fair value being recognised in
other comprehensive income.
Under FVOCI category, fair value changes are recognised in OCI while
dividends are recognised in profit or loss.
On disposal of the investment the cumulative change in fair value is required
to remain in OCI and is not reclassified to profit or loss. However, entities
have the ability to transfer amounts between reserves within equity (i.e.
between the FVOCI reserve and retained earnings).
3. Financial Assets at profit and loss
Fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL) is the residual category in Ind AS 109.
Financial asset (FA) classified and measured at FVTPL if FA is:
*
*
A held-for-trading financial asset
A debt instrument that does not qualify to be measured at amortised cost or
FVOCI
An equity investment which the entity has not elected to classify as at FVOCI
Examples of Financial assets classified and accounted for at fair value through
profit or loss (FVTPL):
*
Derivatives that have not been designated in a hedging relationship, e.g.:
Interest rate swaps
Commodity futures/option contracts
Foreign exchange futures/option contracts
Investments in shares where the entity has not elected to account for at
FVOCI.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.50
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.4 FINANCIAL ASSETS: MEASUREMENT
Measurement of financial assets is driven by their classification and can be broadly explained with
the help of following diagrammatic presentation:
Measurement of Financial Assets
Initial measurement
Subsequent measurement
Fair value
 
Normally evidenced
by the transaction price
(ie, fair value of
consideration given or
received)
Where part of
consideration is for
other than the financial
instrument, then entity
shall measure fair value
of the financial
instrument
FA measured at
Amortised cost
Fair value at initial
recognition
 Principal repayments
Cumulative interest
using EIR*
FA measured at fair value
[FVTPL/FVOCI]
Fair value determined
periodically
 For equity instruments
cost may represent fair value
in some situations
*
Interest. Dividend recorded in
P&L
For
Gains/losses also recorded in
P&L
*EIR - Effective interest rate method
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
FVTPL/FVOCI debt
instruments-
Interest / Dividend
recorded in P&L
Gains/losses also
recorded in P&L
For
FVOCI
instruments -
equity
❖Dividend recorded
in P&L Gains / losses
recorded in OCI
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.51
Based on the above mentioned guidance, the decision tree for classification of financial
assets can be understood with the help of following flow chart:
1
Debt investments
Derivative investments
Equity investments
Contractual cash flows solely payments of principal
and interest
Pass
Business model (BM) test
(at entity level)
Hold to collect 2
contractual
cash flows
BM to collect
contractual
cash flows
and sell asset
Fail Fail Fail
Held for trading?
Neither
1 or 2
No
Yes
Fair value option elected?
FVOCI option
elected?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Amortised
cost
FVOCI (with
reclassification)
FVTPL
FVOCI
(no reclassification)
Accounting for transaction costs for the purpose of Effective interest rate method
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.52
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 20
ABC Bank gave loans to a customer - Target Ltd. that carry fixed interest rate @ 10% per
annum for a 5 year term and 12% per annum for a 3 year term. Additionally, the bank charges
processing fees @1% of the principal amount borrowed. Target Ltd borrowed loans as follows:
10 lacs for a term of 5 years
8 lacs for a term of 3 years.
Compute the fair value upon initial recognition of the loan in books of Target Ltd. and how will
loan processing fee be accounted?
Solution
The loans from ABC Bank carry interest @ 10% and 12% for 5 year term and 3 year term
respectively. Additionally, there is a processing fee payable @ 1% on the principal amount on date
of transaction. It is assumed that ABC Bank charges all customers in a similar manner and hence
this is representative of the market rate of interest.
Amortised cost is computed by discounting all future cash flows at market rate of interest. Further,
any transaction fees that are an integral part of the transaction are adjusted in the effective interest
rate and recognised over the term of the instrument.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.53
Hence loan processing fees shall be reduced from the principal amount to arrive the value on day
1 upon initial recognition.
Fair value (5 year term loan) = 10,00,000 – 10,000 (1% x 10,00,000) = 9,90,000
Fair value (3 year term loan) = 8,00,000  8,000 (1% x 8,00,000) = 7,92,000.
Now, effective interest rate shall be higher than the interest rate of 10% and 12% on
5 year loan and 3 year loan respectively, so that the processing fees gets recognised as interest
over the respective term of loans.
*****
Fair value
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Per Ind AS 113.B2 - The objective of a fair value measurement is to estimate the price at which an
orderly transaction to sell the asset or to transfer the liability would take place between market
participants at the measurement date under current market conditions. A fair value measurement
requires an entity to determine all the following:
(a)
(b)
the particular asset or liability that is the subject of the measurement (consistently with its
unit of account);
for a non-financial asset, the valuation premise that is appropriate for the measurement
(consistently with its highest and best use);
(c)
the principal (or most advantageous) market for the asset or liability.
(d)
the valuation technique(s) appropriate for the measurement, considering the availability of
data with which to develop inputs that represent the assumptions that market participants
would use when pricing the asset or liability and the level of the fair value hierarchy within
which the inputs are categorised.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.54
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Now, we go on to understand the key aspects of initial and subsequent measurement along with how
classification of assets affects their measurement as explained in detail below:
2.5 FINANCIAL ASSETS: INITIAL MEASUREMENT
Fair value of a financial instrument at initial recognition is normally the transaction price (,ie, fair
value of consideration given or received).
Instrument at off-market terms: Sometimes certain type of instruments may be
exchanged at off market terms (,ie, different from market terms for a similar instrument if
exchanged between market participants),
For example, a long-term loan or receivable that carries no interest while similar
instruments if exchanged between market participants carry interest, then fair value
for such loan receivable will be lower from its transaction price owing to the loss of
interest that the holder bears. In such cases where part of the consideration given or
received is for something other than the financial instrument, an entity shall measure
the fair value of the financial instrument.
In the aforementioned example, the fair value of the long-term loan or receivable can
be measured as the present value of all future cash receipts discounted using the
prevailing market rate(s) of interest for a similar instrument (similar as to currency,
term, type of interest rate and other factors) with a similar credit rating. The
additional amount lent is an expense or a reduction of income unless it qualifies for
recognition as some other type of asset.
Transaction costs:
Transaction costs include fees and commission paid to agents (including employees
acting as selling agents), advisers, brokers and dealers, levies by regulatory
agencies and security exchanges, and transfer taxes and duties. Transaction costs
do not include debt premiums or discounts, financing costs or internal administrative
or holding costs.
Any transaction costs incurred for acquisition of the financial asset or issue of
financial liability are adjusted upon initial recognition while determining fair value, if
the financial asset or financial liability is not classified as subsequently measured at
fair value through profit or loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.55
If an entity originates a loan that bears an off-market interest rate (eg 5 per cent
when the market rate for similar loans is 8 per cent), and receives an upfront fee as
compensation, the entity recognises the loan at its fair value, ie net of the fee it
receives.
The decision tree for the aforementioned basis to be applied in establishing fair value at
initial recognition can be understood with following diagrammatic presentation:
Initial measurement
Instrument at market terms
Transaction price
Instrument at off-market terms
Determine fair value of financial instrument
If FV based on Level 1 input or valuation technique that uses
only data from observable markets
Difference between FV and
transaction price
recognized in P&L
Specific transactions:
Any other basis
Difference between FV & transaction price recognized as
(i) asset (if it qualifies to be);
(ii) otherwise amortised to P&L
Determining amortised cost for financial assets carrying floating rate of
interest:
Per Application Guidance in Appendix B B.5.4.5 For floating rate financial
instruments, periodic re-estimation of cash flows to reflect movements in market
rates of interest alters the effective interest rate. To calculate the effective interest in
each relevant period, the effective interest rate is applied to the amortised cost of the
asset or liability at the previous reporting date. However, if the floating rate financial
asset or financial liability is initially recognised at an amount equal to the principal
receivable or payable on maturity, then this periodic re-estimation does not have a
significant effect on the carrying amount of the asset or liability.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.56
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Therefore, in such cases, for practical reasons the carrying amount of a floating rate
instrument would not generally need to be adjusted at each repricing date because
the impact would not generally be significant. In such case
(a)
(b)
Interest income or expense is recognised based on the current market rate.
For a floating rate financial asset or financial liability that is initially recognised
at a discount or premium, the interest income or expense is recognised based
on the current market rate plus or minus amortisation or accretion of the
discount or premium.
Revision of estimated cash flows:
Per Application Guidance in Appendix B to Ind AS 109 B.5.4.6 If there is a change in
the timing or amount of estimated future cash flows (other than due to impairment) –
It shall adjust the gross carrying amount of the financial asset or amortised cost of a
financial liability (or group of financial instruments) to reflect actual and revised
estimated contractual cash flows.
The entity recalculates the gross carrying amount of the financial asset or amortised
cost of the financial liability as the present value of the estimated future contractual
cash flows that are discounted at the financial instrument's original effective
interest rate (or credit-adjusted effective interest rate for purchased or originated
credit-impaired financial assets)
Then the carrying amount of the instrument (or group of financial instruments) is adjusted in
the period of change to reflect the actual and/or revised estimated cash flows, with a
corresponding gain or loss being recognised in profit or loss.
This approach to changes in estimated cash flows should apply to changing prepayment
expectations and other estimates of cash flows under the current terms of the financial
instrument but not to a renegotiation of the contractual terms of an instrument.
Interest income after impairment recognition
If a financial asset or a group of similar financial assets has been written down as a result of
an impairment loss
Then interest income is thereafter recognised using the rate of interest used to
discount the future cash flows for the purpose of measuring the impairment loss.
For assets measured at amortised cost, this interest rate would be the original
effective interest rate.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.57
Loans between group companies
(a) Repayable on demand:
As per Ind AS 113.47 - The fair value of a financial liability with a demand feature
e.g. a demand deposit is not less than the amount payable on demand, discounted
from the first date that the entity could be required to repay the amount. Accordingly –
The fair value of an interest-free loan liability of which the lender can demand
repayment of the face value at any time - i.e. a loan repayable on demand - is
not less than its face value.
This would evenly apply from the perspective of the lender, since a market
participant acting in its best interest would be assumed to maximize value by
demanding immediate repayment and hence, the fair value shall be equal to
the amount payable on demand in books of lender.
(b) No fixed maturity:
If a loan has no fixed maturity date and is available in perpetuity, then in measuring
its fair value, discounting should reflect these terms because a market participant
acting in its best interest would not assume repayment of the loan. Similarly, the
asset holder or lender would also measure fair value that should reflect a market
participant's assumptions about the timing of the future cash flows.
In both of above cases-
*
Any difference between the amount lent and the fair value of the instrument
on initial recognition is recognized as a gain or a loss unless it qualifies for
recognition as an asset or a liability.
If a low-interest loan is given in anticipation of a right to receive goods or
services at favourable prices, then the right may be recognised as an asset if
it qualifies for recognition as an asset, for example: prepaid expenses, etc.
Demand deposits
The fair value of a financial liability with a demand feature e.g. a demand deposit - is not
less than the amount payable on demand, discounted from the first date that the entity
could be required to repay the amount.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.58
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Hence, fair value of a demand deposit would be the amount payable on demand in books of
the party making the deposit (ie, holder of financial asset) as well as in books of entity
accepting the deposit (ie, bearer of financial liability).
Illustration 21: Deposits carrying off-market rate of interest:
Containers Ltd provides containers for use by customers for multiple purposes. The
containers are returnable at the end of the service contract period (3 years) between
Containers Ltd and its customers. In addition to the monthly charge, there is a security
deposit that each customer makes with Containers Ltd for  10,000 per container and such
deposit is refundable when the service contract terminates. Deposits do not carry any
interest. Analyse the fair value upon initial recognition in books of customers leasing
containers. Market rate of interest for 3 year loan is 7% per annum.
Solution
In the above case, lessee (ie, customers leasing the containers) make interest free
deposits, which are refundable at the end of 3 years. Now, this money if it was to lent to a
third party would fetch interest @ 7% per annum.
Hence, discounting all future cash flows (ie, ₹10,000)
Fair value on initial recognition $=10,000/(1+0.07)^{3}=8,163.$
Differential on day $1=10,000-8,163=1,837$
The differential on day 1 shall be treated as follows:
Scenario 1 If fair valuation is determined using level 1 inputs or other observable
inputs, difference on day 1 recognised in profit or loss
Scenario 2 If fair valuation is determined using other inputs, difference on day 1
shall be recognised in profit or loss unless it meets definition of an asset or liability.
However, in case of security deposits level 1 fair value is not available. Therefore, in the above
case, the fair valuation is made based on unobservable inputs and hence applying scenario 2,
difference can be recognised as an asset if it meets the definition. Now, since the lessee gets to
use the containers in return for making an interest free deposit plus monthly charges, the lost
interest representing day 1 difference between value of deposit and its fair value is like "prepaid
lease rent' and can be recognised as such. Prepaid rent (ROU Asset) shall be charged off to
profit or loss in a straight lined manner as depreciation as per Ind AS 16.
*****
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.59
2.6 FINANCIAL ASSETS: SUBSEQUENT MEASUREMENT
As defined in the flow chart above, the subsequent measurement of financial assets is
based on their classification as defined below:
(A)
Assets measured at amortised cost
Assets are classified as measured at amortised cost if below conditions are
met (as explained in paragraph - Financial assets: classification):
(a)
(b)
Financial asset is held with BM whose objective is to hold financial
assets in order to collect contractual cash flows; and
Contractual terms give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are
solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount
outstanding
Where assets are classified as 'amortised cost'
(a)
(b)
They are initially measured at fair value plus or minus transaction costs
as explained above
Subsequently, the carrying value is adjusted for principal repayments
and interest accrued using effective interest rate, as explained earlier.
(B) Assets measured at fair value
For assets not carried at amortised cost, they shall be carried at fair value.
Such assets can be categorised into
(i) Measured at fair value through other comprehensive income
(FVOCI); if-
(a) Following criteria are satisfied:
FA is held with BM whose objective is achieved both by
collecting contractual cash flows and selling FA; and
Contractual terms give rise on specified dates to cash
flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on
the principal amount outstanding
Or
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.60
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(ii)
(b)
An equity instrument, which otherwise shall be carried at fair
value through profit or loss may be irrevocably recognised at fair
value through other comprehensive income,
Measured at fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL):
All assets not classified as 'measured at amortised cost' or 'measured
at fair value through OCI' shall be classified in this category.
Incomes and/ or expenses on assets measured at fair value shall be recognised as follows:
Interest/
dividend
Recognised in
profit or loss
Measured at fair value (FV)
Gains/losses
FVTPL
FVOCI other than
equity instruments
FVOCI - equity
instruments
Realised/Unrealised
FV gains/ losses
Realised FV
gains/ losses
Unrealised FV
Realised/
gains/ losses
Unrealised FV
gains/losses
Recognised in
profit or loss
Recognised in
OCI
If a financial instrument that was previously recognised as a financial asset is measured at
fair value through profit or loss and its fair value decreases below zero, it is a financial
liability measured at fair value.
Equity instruments - where FV not determinable
All investments in equity instruments and contracts on those instruments must be
measured at fair value. However, in limited circumstances, cost may be an
appropriate estimate of fair value. That may be the case if insufficient more recent
information is available to measure fair value, or if there is a wide range of possible
fair value measurements and cost represents the best estimate of fair value within
that range
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.61
Indicators that cost might not be representative of fair value include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
a significant change in the performance of the investee compared with
budgets, plans or milestones.
changes in expectation that the investee's technical product milestones will be
achieved.
a significant change in the market for the investee's equity or its products or
potential products.
a significant change in the global economy or the economic environment in
which the investee operates.
a significant change in the performance of comparable entities, or in the
valuations implied by the overall market.
internal matters of the investee such as fraud, commercial disputes, litigation,
changes in management or strategy.
evidence from external transactions in the investee's equity, either by the
investee (such as a fresh issue of equity), or by transfers of equity
instruments between third parties.
The list above is not exhaustive. An entity shall use all information about the
performance and operations of the investee that becomes available after the date of
initial recognition. To the extent that any such relevant factors exist, they may
indicate that cost might not be representative of fair value. In such cases, the entity
must measure fair value.
Cost is never the best estimate of fair value for investments in quoted equity
instruments (or contracts on quoted equity instruments).
Illustration 22: Accounting for transaction costs on initial and subsequent
measurement of a financial asset measured at fair value with changes through
other comprehensive income:
An entity acquires a financial asset for CU 100 plus a purchase commission of CU 2.
Initially, the entity recognises the asset at CU 102. The reporting period ends one day
later, when the quoted market price of the asset is CU 100. If the asset were sold, a
commission of CU 3 would be paid. How would transaction costs be accounted in books
of the entity?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.62
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
On that date, the entity measures the asset at CU 100 (without regard to the possible
commission on sale) and recognises a loss of CU 2 in other comprehensive income.
If the financial asset is measured at fair value through other comprehensive income
in accordance with Ind AS 109.4.1.2A, the transaction costs are amortised to profit or
loss using the effective interest method.
*****
Illustration 23: Determining fair value upon initial measurement
The shareholders of Company C provide C with financing in the form of loan notes to
enable it to acquire investments in subsidiaries. The loan notes will be redeemed solely
out of dividends received from these subsidiaries and become redeemable only when C
has sufficient funds to do so. In this context, 'sufficient funds' refers only to dividend
receipts from subsidiaries. Analyse the initial measurement of loan notes.
Solution
In this case
Loan notes are repayable only when C earns returns in form of dividends from
subsidiaries. Hence, C cannot be forced to obtain additional external financing or to
liquidate its investments to redeem the shareholder loans. Consequently, the loan notes
are not considered payable on demand.
Accordingly -
Loan notes shall be initially measured at their fair value, being the present value of
the expected future cash flows, discounted using a market-related rate. The amount
and timing of the expected future cash flows should be determined on the basis of
the expected dividend flow from the subsidiaries. Also, the valuation would need to
take into account possible early repayments of principal and corresponding
reductions in interest expense.
Since the loan notes are interest-free or bear lower-than-market interest, there will
be a difference between the nominal value of the loan notes i.e. the amount
granted - and their fair value on initial recognition. Because the financing is provided
by shareholders, acting in the capacity of shareholders, the resulting credit should be
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.63
reflected in equity as a shareholder contribution in C's balance sheet. Conversely, in
books of shareholders, the difference between amount invested and its fair value
shall be recorded as 'investment in C Ltd' being representative of the underlying
relationship between shareholders and C Ltd.
*****
Illustration 24: Use of cost v/s fair value determination for equity instruments
Silver Ltd. has made an investment in optionally convertible preference shares (OCPS) of
a Company – Bronze Ltd. at 100 per share (face value 100 per share). Silver Ltd. has
an option to convert these OCPS into equity shares in the ratio of 1:1 and if such option
not exercised till end of 9 years, then the shares shall be redeemable at the end of 10
years at a premium of 20%.
Analyse the measurement of this investment in books of Silver Ltd.
Solution
The classification assessment for a financial asset is done based on two characteristics:
(i)
(ii)
Whether the contractual cash flows comprise cash flows that are solely payments of
principal and interest on the principal outstanding
Entity's business model (BM) for managing financial assets Whether the
Company's BM is to collect cash flows; or a BM that involves realisation of both
contractual cash flows & sale of financial assets;
In all other cases, the financial assets are measured at fair value through profit or loss.
In the above case, the Holder can realise return either through conversion or redemption at
the end of 10 years, hence it does not indicate contractual cash flows that are solely
payments of principal and interest. Therefore, such investment shall be carried at fair value
through profit or loss. Accordingly, the investment shall be measured at fair value
periodically with gain/ loss recorded in profit or loss.
*****
Illustration 25: Accounting for assets at amortised cost
A Ltd has made a security deposit whose details are described below. Make necessary
journal entries for accounting of the deposit in the first year and last year. Assume market
interest rate for a deposit for similar period to be 12% per annum.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.64
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Solution
The above security deposit is an interest free deposit redeemable at the end of lease
term for 10,00,000. Hence, this involves collection of contractual cash flows and shall
be accounted at amortised cost.
Upon initial measurement -
Journal Entries
Year - 1 beginning
Subsequently, every annual reporting year, interest income shall be accrued @ 12% per
annum and prepaid expenses shall be amortised on straight line basis over the lease term.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.65
Year 1 end
At the end of 5th year, the security deposit shall accrue 10,00,000 and prepaid lease
expenses shall be fully amortised (i.e. depreciated as per Ind AS 116, this prepaid lease
rent would be shown as ROU asset). Journal entry for realisation of security deposit -
*****
Illustration 26: Accounting for assets at FVTPL
A Ltd. invested in equity shares of C Ltd. on 15th March for ₹10,000. Transaction costs
were 500 in addition to the basic cost of  10,000. On 31 March, the fair value of the
equity shares was 11,200 and market rate of interest is 10% per annum for a 10 year
loan. Pass necessary journal entries. Analyse the measurement principle and pass
necessary journal entries.
Solution
The above investment is in equity shares of C Ltd and hence, does not involve any
contractual cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest. Hence, these
equity shares shall be measured at fair value through profit or loss. Also, an
irrecoverable option exists to designate such investment as fair value through other
comprehensive income.
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.66
FINANCIAL REPORTING
*****
Illustration 27: Accounting for assets at FVOCI
Metallics Ltd. has made an investment in equity instrument of a company - Castor Ltd. for
19% equity stake. Significant influence not exercised. The investment was made for
 5,00,000 for 10,000 equity shares on 01 April 20X1. On 30 June 20X1 the fair value
per equity share is 45. The Company has taken an irrevocable option to measure such
investment at fair value through other comprehensive income.
Solution
The Company has made an irrecoverable option to carry its investment at fair value
through other comprehensive income. Accordingly, the investment shall be initially
recognised at fair value and all subsequent fair value gains/ losses shall be recognised in
other comprehensive income (OCI).
Journal Entries
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.67
*****
Illustration 28: Accounting for assets at Amortised Cost
XYZ Ltd. is a company incorporated in India. It provides INR 10,00,000 interest free loan
to its wholly owned Indian subsidiary (ABC). There are no transaction costs.
How should the loan be accounted for, in the separate financial statements of XYZ,
individual financial statements of ABC and consolidated financial statements of the
group?
Consider the following scenarios:
a) The loan is repayable on demand.
b)
c)
The loan is repayable after 3 years. The current market rate of interest for similar
loan is 10% p.a. for both holding and subsidiary.
The loan is repayable when ABC has funds to repay the loan.
Solution
Ind AS 109 requires that a financial assets and liabilities are recognized on initial
recognition at its fair value, as adjusted for the transaction cost. In accordance with Ind
AS 113 Fair Value Measurement, the fair value of a financial liability with a demand
feature (e.g., a demand deposit) is not less than the amount payable on demand,
discounted from the first date that the amount could be required to be paid.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.68
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Using the guidance, the loan will be accounted for as below in various scenarios:
Scenario (a)
Since the loan is repayable on demand, it has fair value equal to cash consideration
given. The parent and subsidiary recognize financial asset and liability, respectively, at
the amount of loan given. Going forward, no interest is accrued on the loan.
Upon repayment, both the parent and the subsidiary reverse the entries made at
origination.
Scenario (b)
Both parent and subsidiary recognize financial asset and liability, respectively, at fair
value on initial recognition. The difference between the loan amount and its fair value is
treated as an equity contribution to the subsidiary. This represents a further investment
by the parent in the subsidiary.
Accounting in the books of XYZ Ltd (Parent)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.69
Accounting in the books of ABC Ltd (Subsidiary)
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.70
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Working Notes:-
Scenario (c)
Generally, a loan, which is repayable when funds are available, can't be stated to be
repayable on demand. Rather, the entities need to estimate repayment date and determine
its measurement accordingly. If the loan is expected to be repaid in three years, its
measurement will be the same as in scenario (b).
In the Consolidated Financial Statements (CFS), the loan and interest income/expense will
get eliminated as intra-group transaction in all three scenarios. Hence the above
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.71
accounting will not have any impact in the CFS. However, if the loan is in foreign currency,
exchange difference will continue to impact the statement of profit and loss in accordance
with the requirements of Ind AS 21.
*****
2.7 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES: CLASSIFICATION
Upon initial recognition, all financial liabilities are measured at fair value. Subsequently, per
Ind AS 109.4.2.1 - the classification of financial liabilities shall be as follows:
(A)
Measured at amortised cost
(B)
Measured at fair value through profit or loss:
Liabilities that meet the definition of "held for trading"
Contingent consideration recognized by an acquirer in a business
combination
Designated at fair value through profit or loss
(C)
(D)
Other specific measurement basis (with changes recognized in profit or loss):
*
financial liabilities that arise when a transfer of a financial asset does not
qualify for derecognition or when the continuing involvement approach
applies: refer paragraph 3.2.15 or 3.2.17 of Ind AS 109
financial guarantee contracts and commitments to provide a loan at a below-
market interest rate are subsequently measured at higher of:
the amount of the loss allowance, and
the amount initially recognised less, when appropriate, the cumulative
amount of income recognised in accordance with the principles of
Ind AS 115."
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.72
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Irrespective of above classification, any financial liabilities may be designated at
fair value through profit or loss if:
(i)
(ii)
It eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or recognition inconsistency
('accounting mismatch') that would otherwise arise from measuring assets or
liabilities; or their gains on a different basis; or
A group of financial liabilities and financial assets is managed and its performance is
evaluated on fair value basis, in accordance with a documented risk management or
investment strategy, and information about that group is provided internally on that
basis to the entity's key management personnel.
Financial assets and financial liabilities held for trading:
Financial assets and liabilities held for trading are defined as those that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
are acquired or incurred principally for the purpose of sale or repurchase in
the near term;
on initial recognition are part of a portfolio of identified financial instruments
that are managed together and for which there is evidence of a recent actual
pattern of short-term profit-taking; or
are derivatives (except for those that are financial guarantee contracts or are
designated effective hedging instruments).
Trading generally reflects active and frequent buying and selling, and financial
instruments held for trading are normally used with the objective of generating a
profit from short-term fluctuations in price or a dealer's margin.
In addition to derivatives that are not accounted for as hedging instruments, financial
liabilities held for trading include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
obligations to deliver financial assets borrowed by a short seller (i.e. an entity
that sells financial assets it has borrowed and does not yet own);
financial liabilities that are incurred with an intention to repurchase them in the
near term, such as quoted debt instruments that the issuer may buy back in
the near term depending on changes in fair value; and
financial liabilities that are part of a portfolio of identified financial instruments
that are managed together and for which there is evidence of a recent pattern
of short-term profit-taking.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.73
However, the fact that a liability is used merely to fund trading activities does not in
itself make that liability one that is held for trading.
Illustration 29: Trade creditors at market terms
A Company purchases its raw materials from a vendor at a fixed price of  1,000
per tonne of steel. The payment terms provide for 45 days of credit period, after
which an interest of 18% per annum shall be charged. How would the creditors be
classified in books of the Company?
Solution
In the above case, creditors for purchase of steel shall be carried at amortised
cost, ie, fair value of amount payable upon initial recognition plus interest (if
payment is delayed). Here, fair value upon initial recognition shall be the price per
tonne. The transaction price is representative of fair value.
*****
Illustration 30
An entity is about to purchase a portfolio of fixed rate assets that will be financed
by fixed rate debentures. Both financial assets and financial liabilities are
subject to the same interest rate risk that gives rise to opposite changes in fair
value that tend to offset each other. Provide your comments.
Solution
The fixed rate assets provide for contractual cash flows and based on business model
of the entity, such fixed rate assets may be classified as 'amortised cost' (if entity
collects contractual cash flows) or fair value through other comprehensive income
(FVOCI) (if entity manages through collecting contractual cash and sale of financial
assets).
In the absence of fair value option, the entity can classify the fixed rate assets as
FVOCI with gains and losses on changes in fair value recognised in other
comprehensive income and fixed rate debentures at amortised cost. However,
reporting both assets and liabilities at fair value through profit and loss, ie, FVTPL
corrects the measurement inconsistency and produces more relevant information.
Hence, it may be appropriate to classify the entire group of fixed rate assets and
fixed rate debentures at fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.74
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.8 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES: MEASUREMENT
Measurement of financial liabilities is driven by their classification upon initial recognition as
follows:
Financial liabilities measured at
Amortised cost:
Interest cost
(recognized using
effective interest
rate)
Unrealised gain/loss
(other than change in
own credit risk)
FVTPL liabilities: Fair value changes
Unrealised gain/loss
for change in own
credit risk
Realised gain/loss
(upon derecognition)
Recorded in P&L on a
periodical basis
Recorded in OCI if it does not
increase mismatch
Specific transactions - restructuring of financial liability
Recorded in P&L upon
derecognition of FL
If the terms of a financial liability are modified substantially, resulting in an extinguishment
of the old financial liability, then the old liability is derecognised and the restructured
financial instrument is treated as a new financial liability. If a modification of a financial
liability results in derecognition of the financial liability, then the effective interest rate of the
new financial liability is calculated based on the revised terms of the financial liability at the
date of the modification. In this case, any costs or fees incurred are recognised as part of
the gain or loss on extinguishment and do not adjust the carrying amount of the new
liability.
If the exchange or modification is not accounted for as an extinguishment, then any costs
and fees incurred are recognised as an adjustment to the carrying amount of the liability.
For changes in future cash flows, the entity shall revised the amortised cost of the financial
liability to reflect revised future cash flows by discounting them to their present value at the
original effective interest rate. The difference between the carrying value and revised
amortised cost is recognized as a gain or loss in profit or loss.
Modification is considered to be substantial if the discounted present value of the cash
flows under the new terms including any fees paid net of any fees received and discounted
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.75
using the original effective interest rate is at least 10% different from the discounted present
value of the remaining cash flows of the original financial liability. Only fees paid or received
between the borrower and the lender including fees paid or received by either the borrower
or lender on the other's behalf are considered in this 10% test.
Illustration 31: Issue of borrowings with fixed rate of interest
A Ltd has borrowed from RBC Bank 10,000 at a fixed interest of 10% per annum. Loan
processing fees were additionally paid for 500 and loan is payable after 5 years in bullet
repayment of principal. Details are as follows:
How would loan be accounted in books of A Ltd?
Solution
The loan taken by A Ltd shall be measured at amortised cost as follows:
Initial measurement - At transaction price less processing fees
$=10,000-500=9,500$
Subsequently - interest to be accrued using effective rate of interest as follows:
* Difference due to approximation
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.76
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Computation of IRR
IRR would be the rate using which the present value of cash flow should come out to be
9,500 i.e. ( 10,000 less 500).
For this, we should first compute present value of cashflows using any two rates as
follows:
*Difference is due to approximation
Taking 10% as discount rate, present value (PV) comes out to be  10,000.
If rate is increased by 3% over a base rate of 10%, PV decreases by  1,055 (i.e.
10,000 less 8945).
=
This would mean that the discount rate to get present value of cashflows equivalent to
9,500 should be 11.42% (i.e. 10% + 1.42%).
Illustration 32: Issue of borrowings with fixed rate of interest
A Ltd has made a borrowing from RBC Bank for 10,000 at a fixed interest of 12% per
annum. Loan processing fees were additionally paid for  500 and loan is payable 4 half-
yearly instalments of  2,500 each. Details are as follows:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.77
Consider IRR is 16.60% p.a.
Solution
The loan taken by A Ltd shall be measured at amortised cost as follows:
Initial measurement - At transaction price less processing fees
$=10,000-500=9,500$
Subsequently - interest to be accrued using effective rate of interest as follows:
*****
Illustration 33: Accounting treatment of processing fees belonging to undisbursed
loan amount
X Ltd. had taken 6 year term loan in April 20X0 from bank and paid processing fees at the
time of sanction of loan.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.78
FINANCIAL REPORTING
The term loan is disbursed in different tranches from April 20X0 to April 20X6. On the
date of transition to Ind AS, i.e. 1.4.20X5, it has calculated the net present value of term
loan disbursed upto 31.03.20X5 by using effective interest rate and proportionate
processing fees has been adjusted in disbursed amount while calculating net present
value.
What will be the accounting treatment of processing fees belonging to undisbursed term
loan amount?
Solution
Processing fee is an integral part of the effective interest rate of a financial instrument and
shall be included while calculating the effective interest rate.
(a)
Accounting treatment in case future drawdown is probable
It may be noted that to the extent there is evidence that it is probable that the
undisbursed term loan will be drawn down in the future, the processing fee is
accounted for as a transaction cost under Ind AS 109, i.e., the fee is deferred and
deducted from the carrying value of the financial liabilities when the draw down
occurs and considered in the effective interest rate calculations.
(b) Accounting treatment in case future drawdown is not probable
If it is not probable that the undisbursed term loan will be drawn down in the future,
then the fees is recognised as an expense on a straight-line basis over the term of
the loan.
*****
Illustration 34: Accounting treatment of prepayment premium and processing fees
for obtaining new loan to prepay old loan
PQR Limited had obtained term loan from Bank A in 20X1-20X2 and paid loan processing
fees and commitment charges.
In May 20X5, PQR Ltd. has availed fresh loan from Bank B as take-over of facility i.e. the
new loan is sanctioned to pay off the old loan taken from Bank A. The company paid
prepayment premium to Bank A to clear the old term loan and paid processing fees to
Bank B for the new term loan.
Whether the prepayment premium and the processing fees both will be treated as
transaction cost (as per Ind AS 109, Financial Instruments) of obtaining the new loan, in
the financial statements of PQR Ltd?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.79
Solution
(a) Accounting treatment of prepayment premium
Ind AS 109, provides that if an exchange of debt instruments or modification of terms
is accounted for as an extinguishment, any costs or fees incurred are recognised as
part of the gain or loss on the extinguishment in the statement of profit and loss.
Since the original loan was prepaid, the prepayment would result in extinguishment
of the original loan. The difference between the CV of the financial liability
extinguished and the consideration paid shall be recognised in profit or loss as per
Ind AS 109.
Accordingly, the prepayment premium shall be recognised as part of the gain or loss
on extinguishment of the old loan.
(b) Accounting treatment of unamortised processing fee of old loan
Processing fees are not amortised separately from the loan. Processing fees are
part of EIR and therefore are amortised with the loan. Therefore, the accounting
treatment of unamortised processing fee will be the same as for the loan that is
derecognised from financial liability and recognised in profit or loss. In other words,
unamortised processing fee related to the old loan will also be required to be
charged to the statement of profit and loss.
(c) Accounting treatment of processing fee for new loan
Transaction costs are "Incremental costs that are directly attributable to the
acquisition, issue or disposal of a financial asset or financial liability. An incremental
cost is one that would not have been incurred if the entity had not acquired, issued
or disposed of the financial instrument."
It is assumed that the loan processing fees solely relates to the origination of the
new loan (i.e. does not represent loan modification/renegotiation fees). Hence, the
processing fees paid to avail fresh loan from Bank B will be considered as
transaction cost in the nature of origination fees of the new loan and will be included
while calculating effective interest rate as per Ind AS 109.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.80
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 35: Accounting treatment of share held as stock in trade
A share broking company is dealing in sale/purchase of shares for its own account and
therefore is having inventory of shares purchased by it for trading.
How will these instruments be accounted for in the financial statements?
Solution
Ind AS 2, Inventories, states that this Standard applies to all inventories, except financial
instruments (Ind AS 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation and Ind AS 109, Financial
Instruments).
Accordingly, the principles of recognising and measuring financial instruments are
governed by Ind AS 109, its presentation is governed by Ind AS 32 and disclosures are in
accordance with Ind AS 107, Financial Instruments: Disclosures, even if these
instruments are held as stock-in trade by a company.
Further Ind AS 101, First-time Adoption of Indian Accounting Standards does not provide
any transitional relief from the application of the above standards.
Accordingly, in the given case, the relevant requirements of Ind AS 109, Ind AS 32 and
Ind AS 107 shall be applied retrospectively.
*****
Difference between measurement requirements of financial liability and equity and their
comparison can be understood with the help of following diagrammatic presentation –
Contractual obligation to
deliver cash
Non derivative contract to
deliver variable number of
No
Yes
Yes
No
Equity
Liability
Liability
Carried at
'cost'
Equity
↓
Carried at
'cost'
Amortised cost
Fair value
All transactions recorded
directly in equity
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Cost recorded in income statement
- Impact on net profit/ OCI
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.81
2.9 RECLASSIFICATION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
Per Ind AS 109.4.4.1  An entity shall reclassify financial assets, only if the entity changes its
business model for managing those financial assets.
Such changes are expected to be very infrequent. Such changes are determined by the
entity's senior management as a result of external or internal changes and must be
significant to the entity's operations and demonstrable to external parties. Accordingly, a
change in an entity's business model will occur only when an entity either begins or ceases
to perform an activity that is significant to its operations; for example, when the entity has
acquired, disposed of or terminated a business line.
Examples of a change in business model include the following:
(a) An entity has a portfolio of commercial loans that it holds to sell in the short term.
The entity acquires a company that manages commercial loans and has a business
model that holds the loans in order to collect the contractual cash flows. The portfolio
of commercial loans is no longer for sale, and the portfolio is now managed together
with the acquired commercial loans and all are held to collect the contractual cash
flows.
(b)
A financial services firm decides to shut down its retail mortgage business. That
business no longer accepts new business and the financial services firm is actively
marketing its mortgage loan portfolio for sale.
Accounting for reclassification of financial assets:
A change in the objective of the entity's business model must be effected before the
reclassification date. For example, if a financial services firm decides on 15
February to shut down its retail mortgage business and hence must reclassify all
affected financial assets on 1 April (ie the first day of the entity's next reporting
period), the entity must not accept new retail mortgage business or otherwise
engage in activities consistent with its former business model after 15 February.
If an entity reclassifies any financial asset, it must do so prospectively from
reclassification date.
The entity shall not restate any previously recognised gains, losses (including
impairment gains or losses) or interest.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.82
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(a)
Following are not changes in business model:
significant changes in market conditions);
a change in intention related to particular financial assets (even in circumstances of
(b)
the temporary disappearance of a particular market for financial assets;
(c)
a transfer of financial assets between parts of the entity with different business
models.
Following changes in circumstances are not reclassifications:
(a)
(b)
(c)
an item that was previously a designated and effective hedging instrument in a cash
flow hedge or net investment hedge no longer qualifies as such;
an item becomes a designated and effective hedging instrument in a cash flow
hedge or net investment hedge; and
changes in measurement for a financial instrument, if the entity takes credit
derivative that is measured at fair value through profit or loss to manage the credit
risk of all, or part of such financial instrument and consequently, the underlying
financial instrument is also designated at fair value through profit or loss.
Financial liabilities are not permitted to be reclassified.
Illustrative examples:
Case 1: Amortised cost to FVTPL
It is measured at fair value on reclassification date.
*
Any gain or loss arising from difference between the previous amortised cost
of the financial asset and fair value is recognised in profit or loss.
Illustration 36
Bonds for
1,00,000 reclassified as FVTPL. Fair value on reclassification is
90,000. Pass the required journal entry.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.83
Case 2: Amortised cost to FVOCI
*
It is measured at fair value on reclassification date.
Any gain or loss arising from difference between the previous amortised cost
of the financial asset and fair value is recognised in other comprehensive
income
Effective interest rate and measurement of expected credit losses are not
adjusted as a result of reclassification.
Illustration 37
Bonds for
1,00,000 reclassified as FVOCI. Fair value on reclassification is
₹90,000. Pass the required journal entry.
Solution
*****
Case 3: FVTPL to Amortised cost
*
It is measured at fair value on reclassification date and this fair value
becomes the new gross carrying amount. Effective interest rate is computed
based on this new gross carrying amount.
Any gain or loss arising from difference between the previous amortised cost
of the financial asset and fair value is recognised in profit or loss.
Illustration 38
Bonds for 100,000 reclassified as Amortised cost. Fair value on reclassification
is  90,000. Pass the required journal entry.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.84
Solution
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Case 4: FVTPL to FVOCI
*****
The financial asset continues to be measured at fair value.
The effective interest rate is determined on the basis of fair value of asset at
reclassification date.
Illustration 39
Bonds for 100,000 reclassified as FVOCI. Fair value on reclassification is
90,000. Pass the required journal entry.
Solution
*****
Case 5: FVOCI to Amortised cost
The financial asset is measured at fair value on reclassification date.
However, cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in other
comprehensive income (OCI) is removed from equity and adjusted against fair
value of financial asset at reclassification date.
As a result, the financial asset is measured at reclassification date as if it had
always been measured at amortised cost. This adjustment affects OCI but
does not affect profit or loss and therefore, is not a reclassification
adjustment.
Effective interest rate and measurement of expected credit losses are not
adjusted as a result of reclassification.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.85
Illustration 40
Bonds for 100,000 reclassified as Amortised cost. Fair value on reclassification
is  90,000 and 10,000 loss was recognised in OCI till date of reclassification.
Pass required journal entry.
Solution
*****
Case 6: FVOCI to FVTPL
The financial asset continues to be measured at fair value.
The cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in other comprehensive
income (OCI) is reclassified from equity to profit or loss as a reclassification
adjustment at the reclassification date.
Illustration 41
Bonds for
100,000 reclassified as FVTPL. Fair value on reclassification is
 90,000. Pass the required journal entry.
Solution
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.86
FINANCIAL REPORTING
2.10 IMPAIRMENT
Scope of impairment
An entity shall recognise a loss allowance for expected credit losses on the following:
(a)
a financial asset that is measured at amortised cost
(b)
(c)
a financial asset that is measured at fair value through other comprehensive income
a lease receivable,
(d)
a contract asset or a loan commitment; and
(e)
a financial guarantee contract
The impairment model does not apply to:
(a)
All financial assets that are equity instruments (because these are measured either
at FVTPL or FVTOCI),
(b)
Financial assets that are debt instruments and are measured as at FVTPL,
(c)
Any other financial instrument measured as at FVTPL.
What is a credit loss allowance?
For financial assets, a credit loss is the present value of the difference between:
(a)
(b)
the contractual cash flows that are due to an entity under the contract; and
the cash flows that the entity expects to receive (i.e,, cash short falls)
discounted at original effective interest rate (or credit adjusted effective
interest rate in case of purchased or originated credit-impaired financial
assets).
An entity shall estimate cash flows by considering all contractual terms of the
financial instrument (for eg.: prepayment, extension, call and similar options) through
the expected life of the financial instrument.
The cash flows that are considered shall include cash flows from sale of collateral
held or other credit enhancements that are integral to the contractual terms. There is
a presumption that the expected life of the financial instrument can be estimated
reliably. In those rare cases when it is no possible to reliably estimate the expected
life of a financial instrument, the entity shall use the remaining contractual term of
the financial instrument.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.87
Different approaches for impairment of financial assets.
(a) General Approach
*
The general approach requires an entity to recognise, at each reporting date,
an impairment loss allowance using either 12 month ECL or lifetime ECL.
12 month ECL typically results in lower impairment since it focuses only on
probability of default (PD) within next 12 month period, as against PD over the
life of an instrument.
The use of ECL depends on whether there has been a significant increase in
credit risk on the instrument since its initial recognition.
This approach is applicable to all financial instruments covered by impairment
requirements of Ind AS 109, except instruments covered in the following two
approaches.
(b) Simplified Approach
(c)
*
*
This approach does not require an entity to track changes in credit risk.
Rather, each entity recognises impairment loss allowance based on lifetime
ECLs at each reporting date, right from its initial recognition.
The application of simplified approach is mandatory for trade receivables or
any contractual right to receive cash or another financial asset that result from
transactions that are within the scope of Ind AS 115 having no significant
financing component.
Purchased or originated credit-impaired (POCI) financial assets approach
This approach is applicable to financial assets which are credit impaired on
purchase/origination.
What is 12-month expected credit losses and lifetime expected credit losses?
Lifetime expected credit loss is the expected credit losses that result from all
possible default events over the expected life of a financial instrument.
12-Month expected credit loss is the portion of the lifetime expected credit losses
that represent the expected credit losses that result from default events on a
financial instrument that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.88
FINANCIAL REPORTING
How the entity determine whether it should apply 12-month ECL or lifetime ECL?
The decision tree to be applied in determining whether the entity needs to provide for
12-month expected credit losses or life time expected credit losses is applied as follows:
Appendix A of Ind AS 109 defines gross carrying amount of a financial asset as the
amortised cost of a financial asset, before adjusting for any loss allowance.
Appendix A of Ind AS 109 defines amortised cost of a financial asset or financial
liability as the amount at which the financial asset or financial liability is measured at initial
recognition minus the principal repayments, plus or minus the cumulative amortisation using
the effective interest method of any difference between that initial amount and the maturity
amount and, for financial assets, adjusted for any loss allowance.
Determining whether credit risk has increased significantly:
Ind AS 107 defines credit risk as 'the risk that one party to a financial instrument will cause
a financial loss for the other party by failing to discharge an obligation'.
When determining whether the recognition of lifetime expected credit losses is
required, an entity shall consider reasonable and supportable information that is
available without undue cost or effort and that may affect the credit risk on a financial
instrument.
The following non-exhaustive list of information may be relevant in assessing
changes in credit risk:
(a) significant changes in internal price indicators of credit risk as a result of a
change in credit risk since inception, including, but not limited to, the credit
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.89
spread that would result if a particular financial instrument or similar financial
instrument with the same terms and the same counterparty were newly
originated or issued at the reporting date.
(b)
other changes in the rates or terms of an existing financial instrument that
would be significantly different if the instrument was newly originated or
issued at the reporting date (such as more stringent covenants, increased
amounts of collateral or guarantees, or higher income coverage) because of
changes in the credit risk of the financial instrument since initial recognition.
(c) significant changes in external market indicators of credit risk for a particular
financial instrument or similar financial instruments with the same expected
life. Changes in market indicators of credit risk include, but are not limited to:
(i)
the credit spread;
(ii)
the credit default swap prices for the borrower;
(iii)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(iv)
the length of time or the extent to which the fair value of a financial
asset has been less than its amortised cost; and
other market information related to the borrower, such as changes in
the price of a borrower's debt and equity instruments.
an actual or expected significant change in the financial instrument's external
credit rating.
an actual or expected internal credit rating downgrade for the borrower or
decrease in behavioural scoring used to assess credit risk internally.
existing or forecast adverse changes in business, financial or economic
conditions that are expected to cause a significant change in the borrower's
ability to meet its debt obligations, such as an actual or expected increase in
interest rates or an actual or expected significant increase in unemployment
rates
an actual or expected significant change in the operating results of the
borrower, for eg.: actual or expected declining revenues or margins,
increasing operating risks, working capital deficiencies, decreasing asset
quality, increased balance sheet leverage, liquidity, management problems or
changes in the scope of business or organisational structure, etc. that results
in a significant change in the borrower's ability to meet its debt obligations
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.90
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(h)
significant increases in credit risk on other financial instruments of the same
borrower
(i)
an actual or expected significant adverse change in the regulatory, economic,
or technological environment of the borrower
(j)
(k)
significant changes in the value of the collateral supporting the obligation or in
the quality of third-party guarantees or credit enhancements;
a significant change in the quality of the guarantee provided by a shareholder
(or an individual's parents) if the shareholder (or parents) have an incentive
and financial ability to prevent default by capital or cash infusion
(1) significant changes, such as reductions in financial support from a parent
entity or other affiliate or an actual or expected significant change in the
quality of credit enhancement, that are expected to reduce the borrower's
economic incentive to make scheduled contractual payments
(m) expected changes in the loan documentation including an expected breach of
contract that may lead to covenant waivers or amendments, interest payment
holidays, interest rate step-ups, requiring additional collateral or guarantees,
or other changes to the contractual framework of the instrument
(n)
(o)
(p)
significant changes in the expected performance and behaviour of the
borrower, including changes in the payment status of borrowers in the group
changes in the entity's credit management approach in relation to the financial
instrument; ie based on emerging indicators of changes in the credit risk of
the financial instrument, the entity's credit risk management practice is
expected to become more active or to be focused on managing the
instrument, including the instrument becoming more closely monitored or
controlled, or the entity specifically intervening with the borrower.
Other past due information.
30 days past due rebuttable presumption:
Regardless of the way in which an entity assesses significant increases in credit risk, there
is a rebuttable presumption that the credit risk on a financial asset has increased
significantly since initial recognition when contractual payments are more than 30 days past
due.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.91
An entity can rebut this presumption if the entity has reasonable and supportable
information that is available without undue cost or effort, that demonstrates that the
credit risk has not increased significantly since initial recognition even though the
contractual payments are more than 30 days past due.
When an entity determines that there have been significant increases in credit risk
before contractual payments are more than 30 days past due, the rebuttable
presumption does not apply.
What is credit impaired financial assets:
A financial asset is credit-impaired when one or more events that have a detrimental
impact on the estimated future cash flows of that financial asset have occurred.
Evidence that a financial asset is credit-impaired include observable data about the
following events:
(a)
Significant financial difficulty of the issuer or the borrower;
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Breach of contract, such as a default or past due event;
Lender(s) of the borrower, for economic or contractual reasons relating to the
borrower's financial difficulty, having granted to the borrower a concession(s)
that the lender(s) would not otherwise consider;
It is becoming probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy or other
financial reorganisation;
the disappearance of an active market for that financial asset because of
financial difficulties; or
the purchase or origination of a financial asset at a deep discount that reflects
the incurred credit losses.
It may not be possible to identify a single discrete event-instead, the combined effect
of several events may have caused financial assets to become credit-impaired.
Measurement of expected credit losses:
An entity shall measure expected credit losses of a financial instrument in a way that
reflects:
(a) an unbiased and probability-weighted amount that is determined by evaluating
a range of possible outcomes;
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.92
FINANCIAL REPORTING
(b)
(c)
the time value of money; and
reasonable and supportable information that is available without undue cost or
effort at the reporting date about past events, current conditions and forecasts
of future economic conditions.
When measuring expected credit losses, an entity need not necessarily identify
every possible scenario. However, it shall consider the risk or probability that a credit
loss occurs by reflecting the possibility that a credit loss occurs and the possibility
that no credit loss occurs, even if the possibility of a credit loss occurring is very low.
The maximum period to consider when measuring expected credit losses is the
maximum contractual period (including extension options) over which the entity is
exposed to credit risk and not a longer period, even if that longer period is consistent
with business practice.
An entity may use practical expedients when measuring expected credit losses.
An example of a practical expedient is the calculation of the expected credit losses
on trade receivables using a provision matrix. The entity would use its historical
credit loss experience for trade receivables to estimate the 12-month expected credit
losses or the lifetime expected credit losses on the financial assets as relevant. A
provision matrix might, for example, specify fixed provision rates depending on the
number of days that a trade receivable is past due (for example, 1 per cent if not
past due, 2 per cent if less than 30 days past due, 3 per cent if more than 30 days
but less than 90 days past due, 20 per cent if 90-180 days past due etc).
Depending on the diversity of its customer base, the entity would use appropriate
groupings if its historical credit loss experience shows significantly different loss
patterns for different customer segments. Examples of criteria that might be used to
group assets include geographical region, product type, customer rating, collateral or
trade credit insurance and type of customer (such as wholesale or retail).
Illustration 42:12 month expected credit loss - Probability of default approach
Entity A originates a single 10 year amortising loan for CU1 million. Taking into
consideration the expectations for instruments with similar credit risk (using reasonable
and supportable information that is available without undue cost or effort), the credit risk
of the borrower, and the economic outlook for the next 12 months, Entity A estimates that
the loan at initial recognition has a probability of default (PoD) of 0.5 per cent over the
next 12 months. Entity A also determines that changes in the 12-month PoD are a
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.93
reasonable approximation of the changes in the lifetime PoD for determining whether
there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition. Loss given
default (LGD) is estimated as 25% of the balance outstanding. Calculate loss allowance.
Solution
At reporting date, no change in 12-month POD and entity assesses that there is no
significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition
therefore lifetime ECL is not
required to be recognised.
*****
Illustration 43: 12 month expected credit loss - Loss rate approach
Bank A originates 2,000 bullet loans with a total gross carrying amount of CU 500,000.
Bank A segments its portfolio into borrower groups (Groups X and Y) on the basis of
shared credit risk characteristics at initial recognition. Group X comprises 1,000 loans
with a gross carrying amount per client of CU 200, for a total gross carrying amount of CU
200,000. Group Y comprises 1,000 loans with a gross carrying amount per client of CU
300, for a total gross carrying amount of CU 300,000. There are no transaction costs and
the loan contracts include no options (for example, prepayment or call options), premiums
or discounts, points paid, or other fees. Calculate loss rate when
Solution
Bank A measures expected credit losses on the basis of a loss rate approach for
Groups X and Y. In order to develop its loss rates, Bank A considers samples of its
own historical default and loss experience for those types of loans.
In addition, Bank A considers forward-looking information, and updates its historical
information for current economic conditions as well as reasonable and supportable
forecasts of future economic conditions. Historically, for a population of 1,000 loans
in each group, Group X's loss rates are 0.3 per cent, based on four defaults, and
historical loss rates for Group Y are 0.15 per cent, based on two defaults.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.94
FINANCIAL REPORTING
*****
Illustration 44: Life time expected credit losses (provision matrix for short term
receivables)
Company M, a manufacturer, has a portfolio of trade receivables of CU 30 million in 20X1
and operates only in one geographical region. The customer base consists of a large
number of small clients and the trade receivables are categorised by common risk
characteristics that are representative of the customers' abilities to pay all amounts due in
accordance with the contractual terms. The trade receivables do not have a significant
financing component in accordance with Ind AS 115. In accordance with paragraph
5.5.15 of Ind AS 109 the loss allowance for such trade receivables is always measured at
an amount equal to lifetime expected credit losses.
Please use the following information of debtors outstanding:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.95
Solution
To determine the expected credit losses for the portfolio, Company M uses a provision
matrix. The provision matrix is based on its historical observed default rates over the
expected life of the trade receivables and is adjusted for forward-looking estimates. At
every reporting date the historical observed default rates are updated and changes in the
forward-looking estimates are analysed. In this case it is forecast that economic
conditions will deteriorate over the next year.
On that basis, Company M estimates the following provision matrix:
The trade receivables from the large number of small customers amount to CU 30 million
and are measured using the provision matrix.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.96
FINANCIAL REPORTING
QUICK RECAP
The classification and measurement of financial instruments are summarized as below :
Financial asset (FA) will be classified as amortised cost if the objective is to hold the
financial asset in order to collect contractual cash flows and contractual terms give rise to
cash flows that are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest (SPPI) on the principal
amount outstanding.
Contractual terms give rise to cash flows that are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest
on the principal amount outstanding. Contractual cash flows must be consistent with a basic
lending arrangement. In respect of Interest element, factors such as time value of money,
Credit risk, Liquidity, profit margin, service or administrative costs etc. should be
considered. Contractual cash flows linked to features such as changes in equity or
commodity prices, would not pass the SPPI test because they introduce exposure to risks
or volatility. SPPI Test will be met if there is a prepayment penalty i.e. additional
compensation for early termination or extension of contract.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
An entity may have one of the following models for its debt instruments :
11.97
(a)
Hold to collect contractual cash flows
(b)
Hold to collect contractual cash flows and selling financial assets
(c) Other business model - Actively buying & Selling
Financial asset (FA) in debt instruments is measured at fair value through OCI (FVTOCI) if
it meets both 'Hold-to-collect and sell' business model test and 'SPPI' contractual cash flow
characteristics test.
In respect of Financial asset (FA) in equity instruments, Ind AS 109 requires all equity
investments to be measured at fair value. All changes in fair value to be recognised in
profit or loss. However, Entities can make an irrevocable election at initial recognition to
classify the instruments as at FVOCI. Such option is available instrument by instrument i.e.
(item by item) and all subsequent changes in fair value being recognised in OCI. Dividends
received on equity investments to be recognised in profit or loss.
Transaction costs are incremental costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition,
issue or disposal of a financial instrument
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
