ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
UNIT 4:
11.135
DERIVATIVES AND EMBEDDED DERIVATIVES
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Derivatives may exist as standalone financial instruments or may be embedded in other financial
or non-financial instruments.
In Unit 3 of this chapter, we analysed the definitions of financial liability and equity. Both these
definitions envisage situations in which an instrument is settled by exchange of own equity
instruments which are derivatives. To be specific, let's reproduce the relevant portion of these
definitions and set the context of discussion for this paragraph in terms of this situation.
Financial liability
A
financial instrument that fulfils either of (A) or (B) below:
(A)
(B)
An instrument that will or may be settled in the entity's own equity instruments and is:
(i)
(ii)
a derivative that will or may be settled other than by the exchange of a fixed
amount of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of the entity's own
equity instruments.
Equity
A
financial instrument that fulfils both (A) and (B) below:
(A)
(B)
An instrument that will or may be settled in the entity's own equity instruments and is:
(i)
(ii)
a derivative that will or may be settled only by the exchange of a fixed amount
of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of the entity's own equity
instruments.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.136
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.2 DEFINITION
4.2.1 Derivatives
Ind AS 109.Appendix A defines a derivative as a financial instrument or other contract with all of the
following three characteristics:
i. Value changes due to an underlying: its value changes in response to the change in a
specified interest rate, financial instrument price, commodity price, foreign exchange rate,
index of prices or rates, credit rating or credit index, or other variable, provided in the case
of a non-financial variable that the variable is not specific to a party to the contract
(sometimes called the 'underlying');
Examples of common derivative contracts and the identified underlying variable:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.137
The definition of derivative excludes contracts which fulfil following two conditions:
Value of the contract changes with reference to one or more non-financial variables;
and
That non-financial variable is specific to one of the parties to the contract.
As per paragraph BA.5 of Ind AS 109, a change in the fair value of a non-financial asset is
specific to the owner if the fair value reflects not only changes in market prices for such assets
(a financial variable) but also the condition of the specific non-financial asset held (a non-
financial variable).
Examples of non-financial variables that are not specific to a party to the contract are an
index of earthquake losses in a particular region and an index of temperatures in a particular
city.
Non-financial variables specific to a party to the contract include:
the occurrence or non-occurrence of a fire that damages or destroys an asset of a
party to the contract
residual value of an asset which changes in response to changes in the asset's
physical condition
Derivatives give one party a contractual right to exchange financial assets or financial
liabilities with another party under conditions that are potentially favourable, or a contractual
obligation to exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with another party under
conditions that are potentially unfavourable. Because the terms of the exchange are
determined at inception, as prices in the financial markets change, those terms may become
favourable or unfavourable.
A derivative usually has a notional amount, which can be an amount of currency, a number
of shares, a number of units of weight or volume or other units specified in the contract. The
changes in value of a derivative are measured corresponding to the notional amount. Refer
illustration 1 and 2 below.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ii.
11.138
FINANCIAL REPORTING
No or little initial net investment: it requires no initial net investment or an initial net
investment that is smaller than would be required for other types of contracts that would be
expected to have a similar response to changes in market factors.
Illustration 1: Prepaid interest rate swap (fixed rate payment obligation prepaid at
inception)
Entity S enters into a 100 crores notional amount five-year pay-fixed, receive-variable
interest rate swap with Counterparty C.
The interest rate of the variable part of the swap is reset on a quarterly basis to
three-month Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR).
The interest rate of the fixed part of the swap is 10% p.a.
Entity S prepays its fixed obligation under the swap of ₹50 crores (100 crores ×
$10\%\times5$ years) at inception, discounted using market interest rates
Entity S retains the right to receive interest payments on the 100 crores reset
quarterly based on three-month SOFR over the life of the swap.
Analyse.
Solution
The initial net investment in the interest rate swap is significantly less than the notional
amount on which the variable payments under the variable leg will be calculated. The
contract requires an initial net investment that is smaller than would be required for other
types of contracts that would be expected to have a similar response to changes in market
factors, such as a variable rate bond.
Therefore, the contract fulfils the condition 'no initial net investment or an initial net investment
that is smaller than would be required for other types of contracts that would be expected to
have a similar response to changes in market factors'.
Even though Entity S has no future performance obligation, the ultimate settlement of the
contract is at a future date and the value of the contract changes in response to changes in
the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) index. Accordingly, the contract is regarded
as a derivative contract.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Illustration 2: Prepaid pay-variable, receive-fixed interest rate swap
11.139
Entity S enters into a 100 crores notional amount five-year pay-variable, receive-
fixed interest rate swap with Counterparty C.
The variable leg of the swap is reset on a quarterly basis to three-month SOFR.
The fixed interest payments under the swap are calculated as 10% of the swap's
notional amount, i.e. 10 crores p.a.
Entity S prepays its obligation under the variable leg of the swap at inception at
current market rates. Say, that amount is 36 crores.
It retains the right to receive fixed interest payments of 10% on ₹100 crores every
year.
Analyse.
Solution
In effect, this contract results in an initial net investment of 36 crores which yields a cash
inflow of 10 crores every year, for five years. By discharging the obligation to pay variable
interest rate payments, Entity S in effect provides a loan to Counterparty C.
Therefore, all else being equal, the initial investment in the contract should equal that of other
financial instruments that consist of fixed annuities. Thus, the initial net investment in the
pay-variable, receive-fixed interest rate swap is equal to the investment required in a non-
derivative contract that has a similar response to changes in market conditions.
For this reason, the instrument fails the condition 'no initial net investment or an initial net
investment that is smaller than would be required for other types of contracts that would be
expected to have a similar response to changes in market factors'. Therefore, the contract
is not accounted for as a derivative contract.
*****
Illustration 3: Prepaid forward
Entity XYZ enters into a forward contract to purchase 1 million ordinary shares of Entity T
in one year
The current market price of T is 50 per share
The one-year forward price of T is 55 per share
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
iii.
11.140
FINANCIAL REPORTING
XYZ is required to prepay the forward contract at inception with a 50 million
payment.
Analyse.
Solution
Purchase of 1 million shares for current market price is likely to have the same response to
changes in market factors as the contract mentioned above. Accordingly, the prepaid forward
contract does not meet the initial net investment criterion of a derivative instrument.
*****
Future settlement: it is settled at a future date.
However, it is not relevant whether the derivative is settled gross or not. For example, an
interest rate swap is a derivative instrument, whether the counterparties pay interest to each
other or settle it on a net basis.
Further, an option, say a call option i.e. a right to purchase shares at a fixed price at a certain
date in future, may expire unexercised at maturity because it is 'out of money'. Such a
contract is still a derivative contract because expiry at maturity is also a form of settlement
even though there is no exchange of consideration eventually.
Illustration 4
Entity ABC Ltd., whose functional currency is Indian Rupees, sells products in France
denominated in Euro. ABC enters into a contract with an investment bank to convert Euro
to Indian Rupees at a fixed exchange rate. The contract requires ABC to remit Euro based
on its sales volume in France in exchange for Indian Rupees at a fixed exchange rate of
80.00. Is that contract a derivative?
Solution
Yes. The contract has two underlying variables (the foreign exchange rate and the volume
of sales); no initial net investment or an initial net investment that is smaller than would be
required for other types of contracts that would be expected to have a similar response to
changes in market factors, and a payment provision.
*****
Illustration 5
The definition of a derivative requires that the instrument "is settled at a future date". Is
this criterion met even if an option is expected not to be exercised, for example, because
it is out of the money?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.141
Solution
Yes. An option is settled upon exercise or at its maturity. Expiry at maturity is a form of
settlement even though there is no additional exchange of consideration.
Accounting for derivatives
*****
All derivatives are measured at fair value with changes in fair value being recognized in profit and
loss for the period, except derivatives that qualify as hedging instruments. Accounting for derivatives
that qualify as hedging instruments is dealt with in the Hedge Accounting chapter.
Illustration 6
Silver Ltd. has purchased 100 ounces of gold on 10 March 20X1. The transaction provides for a
price payable which is equal to market value of 100 ounces of gold on 10 April 20X1 and shall be
settled by issue of such number of equity shares as is required to settle the aforementioned
transaction price at 10 per share on 10 April 20X1. Whether this is classified as liability or
equity? Own use exemption does not apply.
Solution
In the above scenario, there is a contract for purchase of 100 ounces of gold whose consideration
varies in response to changing value of gold. Analysing this contract as a derivative
(a)
Value of contract changes in response to change in market value of gold;
(b)
There is no initial net investment
(c)
It will be settled at a future date, i.e. 10 April 20X1.
Since the above criteria are met, this is a derivative contract.
Now, a derivative contract that is settled in own equity other than exchange of fixed amount of cash
for fixed number of shares is classified as 'liability'. In this case, since the contract results in issue
of variable number of shares based on transaction price to be determined in future, hence, this shall
be classified as 'derivative financial liability'.
Per Ind AS 109.4.2.1 - A derivative financial liability shall be carried at fair value through profit or
loss.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.142
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Illustration 7: Derivative contract:
Entity  B Ltd writes an option contract for sale of shares of Target Ltd. at a fixed price of
100 per share to C Ltd. This option is exercisable anytime for a period of 90 days ('American
option'). Evaluate this under the definition of financial instrument.
Solution
In the above case B Ltd has written an option, which if exercised by C Ltd. will result in B Ltd.
selling equity shares of Target Ltd. for fixed price of 100 per share. Such option will be exercised
by C Ltd. only if the market price of shares of Target Ltd. increases beyond
 100, thereby resulting in contractual obligation over B Ltd. to settle the contract under potential
unfavorable terms.
If the market price goes to
120 then the option will be exercised by C Ltd. So, B Ltd has to buy
shares from the market at
120 per share and sell at 100, thereby resulting in a loss or exchange
at unfavorable terms to B Ltd. Hence, the option will meet the definition of financial liability in the
books of B Ltd.
The additional question that arises here is the nature of this financial liability and whether it meets
the definition of derivative. A derivative is a financial instrument that meets following conditions:
(a)
(b)
Its value changes in response to change in specified variable like interest rate, equity index,
commodity price, etc. If the variable is non-financial, it is not specific to party to the contract
It requires no or little initial net investment
(c)
It is settled at a future date.
Evaluating the above instrument, B Ltd. has written an option whose value changes based on change
in market price of equity share, it requires no initial net investment and is settled at a future date
(anytime in 90 days). Hence, it meets definition of derivative financial liability in books of B Ltd.
*****
Illustration 8: Derivative contract to be settled in own equity instruments
A Ltd. issues warrants to all existing shareholders entitling them to purchase additional equity
shares of A Ltd. (with face value of 100 per share) at an issue price of 150 per share. Evaluate
whether this constitutes an equity instrument or a financial liability?
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.143
Solution
In this case, Company A Ltd. has issued warrants entitling the shareholders to purchase equity
shares of the Company at a fixed price. Hence, it constitutes a contractual arrangement for
issuance of fixed number of shares against fixed amount of cash.
Now, evaluating this contract under definition of derivative –
(i)
The value of warrant changes in response to change in value of underlying equity shares;
This involves no initial net investment
(ii)
(iii)
It shall be settled at a future date.
Hence, this warrant meets the definition of derivative.
Applying definition of equity under Ind AS 32, a derivative contract that will be settled by exchange
of fixed number of equity shares for fixed amount of cash meets definition of equity instrument. The
above contract is derivative contract that will be settled by issue of fixed number of own equity
instruments by A Ltd. for fixed amount of cash and hence meets definition of equity instrument.
*****
4.2.2 Embedded derivatives
Paragraph 4.3.1 of Ind AS 109 defines an embedded derivative as:
"An embedded derivative is:
a component of a hybrid contract
that also includes a non-derivative host
with the effect that some of the cash flows of the combined instrument vary in a way similar
to a stand-alone derivative.
An embedded derivative causes:
some or all of the cash flows that otherwise would be required by the contract
to be modified according to a specified interest rate, financial instrument price, commodity
price, foreign exchange rate, index of prices or rates, credit rating or credit index, or other
variable,
provided in the case of a non-financial variable that the variable is not specific to a party to
the contract.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.144
FINANCIAL REPORTING
A derivative that is attached to a financial instrument but is contractually transferable independently
of that instrument, or has a different counterparty, is not an embedded derivative, but a separate
financial instrument."
Examples 1-3 of embedded derivatives:
1.
2.
3.
Company MNL Ltd. holds a bond which is convertible into the ordinary shares of Company
Z Ltd. The hybrid contract is the convertible bond; the host contract is the bond asset; the
embedded derivative is the conversion option.
Company ABC Ltd. enters into a lease with an inflation factor, such that each year rentals
are adjusted for changes in risk price index. The hybrid contract is the entire lease; the
host is the lease contract, the embedded derivative is the adjustment to the risk price index.
Company PQR Ltd. sells furniture to Company XYZ Ltd. in USD. Both companies are
located in India. The hybrid contract is the entire sale contract which will be settled in USD;
the host contract is the Rupee sale contract; the embedded derivative is the foreign
exchange /USD forward.
Illustration 9
A lease contract contains a provision that rentals increase each year by 3 million. Is there an
embedded derivative in this contract?
Solution
The price adjustment feature does not meet the definition of a derivative on a stand-alone basis
since its value does not change in response to changes of some underlying. There is no
underlying in this case; hence there is no embedded derivative in the lease contract.
*****
4.2.2.1 Separation of embedded derivatives from host contract
In certain circumstances, an embedded derivative is required to be separated from the host
contract and accounted for separately as a financial instrument. The flowchart at the next page
analyses those circumstances.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Does the hybrid contract contain a host that is an asset within
the scope of Ind AS 109?
No - separate embedded derivatives
that fulfil certain conditions as below
11.145
Yes - don't separate
embedded derivatives
(Refer note 1 below)
Economic characteristics and risks Yes
of the embedded derivative are
closely related to those of the host?
No
A separate instrument with the
same terms as the embedded
derivative would meet the
definition of a derivative?
Yes
Is the hybrid contract
measured at fair value
through profit or loss?
No
Embedded derivative is
separated and accounted for
separately (refer section below)
No
Yes
Entire hybrid instrument
is measured at fair value
through profit or loss
(Refer note 2 below)
Note 1: This implies that embedded derivatives are permitted to be separated from only such hybrid
contracts that contain a host which is either a (a) financial instrument classified as financial liability
or equity or compound; or (b) contract for purchase or sale of a non-financial item.
Note 2: If both the host and embedded derivative have economic characteristics of an equity
instrument, the hybrid instrument is not carried at fair value through profit or loss. In other words,
this measurement category is applicable only for host contracts which are financial liabilities.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.146
FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.2.2.2 Economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative - whether
closely related to those of the host?
Paragraphs B4.3.5 and B4.3.8 of Ind AS 109 provide examples of situations in which economic
characteristics of the embedded derivative are considered to be closely related or not closely related
to those of the host.
Some of these examples are explained below, though students are advised to understand all the
examples given in the application guidance of the standards.
1. Underlying indices
Illustration 10: Debt instrument with indexed repayments
Entity X issues a redeemable fixed interest rate debenture to Entity Y. Amount of interest
and principal is indexed to the value of equity instruments of Entity X.
Analyse
Solution
In the given case, the host is a fixed interest rate debt instrument. The economic
characteristics and risks of a debt instrument are not closely related to those of an equity
instrument.
Hence, the exposure of this hybrid instrument to changes in value of equity instruments is
an embedded derivative which is required to be separated.
The response above will not change even if the interest payment and principal repayments
are indexed to a commodity index or similar underlying.
*****
Illustration 11: Lease contracts dependent on inflation index
A lease contract, between two Indian companies of an asset in India, includes contingent
lease rentals that are dependent upon an US inflation index. Can the entity treat inflation
linked features as closely related?
Solution
For inflation linked features, an embedded derivative in a lease contract is considered as
closely related to the host if it is an inflation-related index related to inflation in the entity's
own economic environment.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
2.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.147
In this case, whilst the asset and the lessor and lessee are located in India, lease payment
are linked to US index. Hence, embedded derivative is not closely related and needs to be
separated.
*****
Illustration 12: Lease contracts dependent on inflation index
As per the contract entered between lease and lessor, lease rentals will increase by
3 million, if profit after tax is over 200 million. Can the entity treat inflation linked
features as closely related?
Solution
No. Whilst contingent rentals based on sales are closely related to a host lease contract,
the same is not true of contingent rentals based on profit after tax.
Prepayment options in debt instruments
*****
It is very common to have debt prepayment options in ordinary borrowing arrangements.
Paragraph B4.3.5(e) of Ind AS 109 provides the guidance in this respect:
"A call, put, or prepayment option embedded in a host debt contract or host insurance contract
is not closely related to the host contract unless:
i. the option's exercise price is approximately equal on each exercise date to the
amortised cost of the host debt instrument or the carrying amount of the host
insurance contract;
ii.
or
the exercise price of a prepayment option reimburses the lender for an amount up
to the approximate present value of lost interest for the remaining term of the host
contract. Lost interest is the product of the principal amount prepaid multiplied by
the interest rate differential. The interest rate differential is the excess of the effective
interest rate of the host contract over the effective interest rate the entity would
receive at the prepayment date if it reinvested the principal amount prepaid in a
similar contract for the remaining term of the host contract.
The assessment of whether the call or put option is closely related to the host debt contract is made
before separating the equity element of a convertible debt instrument in accordance with Ind AS 32."
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.148
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Ind AS 109 does not interpret the term "approximately equal". Management of entities will need to
adopt a consistent accounting policy to apply this principle in general.
Illustration 13: Debt instrument with prepayment option
Entity PQR borrows 100 crores from CFDH Bank on 1 April 20X1. Interest is payable at 12%
p.a. and there is a bullet repayment of principal at the end of the term.
Term of the loan is 6 years.
The loan includes an option to prepay the loan at 1st April each year with a prepayment penalty of
3%. There are no transaction costs. Without the prepayment option, the interest rate quoted by
bank is 11% p.а.
Analyse
Solution
Step 1: Identify the host contract and embedded derivative, if any
In the given case,
Host is a debt instrument comprising annual interest payment at 12% p.a. and bullet principal
repayment at the end of 6 years.
Option to prepay the debt at 103 crores is an embedded derivative
Step 2: Determine the amortised cost of the host debt instrument
Whether the prepayment option is likely to be exercised or not, the amortised cost of the host debt
instrument should be calculated as present value (PV) of expected cash flows using a fair market
interest rate for a debt without the prepayment option (11% p.a. in this case). This is calculated
below as 104.23 crores:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.149
Step 3: Compare the exercise price of the prepayment option with the amortised cost of the
host debt instrument
The management of Entity PQR may formulate an appropriate accounting policy to determine what
constitutes "approximately equal". In this case, if the management determines that a difference of
more than 2% will indicate that the option's exercise price is not approximately equal to the amortised
cost of the host debt instrument, it will need to separate the embedded derivative and account for it
as per principles given in the subsequent sub-section.
It may be questioned as to why an option to repay a fixed rate loan early meets the definition of
embedded derivative. Let us revisit an important phrase from the definition of embedded derivative:
"...some or all of the cash flows that otherwise would be required by the contract to be modified..."
In the context of a fixed rate debt, it may be interpreted that:
the option affects cash flows only if exercised; and
the cash flows of a fixed rate debt do not vary with interest rates.
However, in this context, a variation in cash flows should be interpreted as a possible change in the
fair value of expected cash flows. Accordingly, the option's expected cash flows vary according to
interest rates in a similar way as a separate option to purchase a fixed rate debt asset at a fixed
price. A fixed price option to prepay a fixed rate loan will increase in value as interest rates decline
(and vice versa).
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
11.150
FINANCIAL REPORTING
3. Foreign currency derivative embedded in contract for purchase or sale of non-
financial items
Another common situation in trade and commerce in today's world is a contract for the purchase
or sale of a non-financial item where the price is denominated in a foreign currency. Paragraph
B4.3.8(d) provides following guidance in this respect.
"An embedded foreign currency derivative in a host contract that is an insurance contract or not a
financial instrument is closely related to the host contract provided it is not leveraged, does not
contain an option feature, and requires payments denominated in one of the following currencies:
i.
ii.
iii.
the functional currency of any substantial party to that contract;
the currency in which the price of the related good or service that is acquired or delivered
is routinely denominated in commercial transactions around the world (such as the US
dollar for crude oil transactions); or
a currency that is commonly used in contracts to purchase or sell non-financial items in the
economic environment in which the transaction takes place (eg a relatively stable and liquid
currency that is commonly used in local business transactions or external trade)."
The functional currencies of the parties should be determined in accordance with the definition
and guidance in Ind AS 21.9 to 13.
Unless the above exceptions apply, the embedded foreign currency derivative should be
separated from the host contract. Certain guidance on how to carry out the separation are
enumerated below in detail:
1.
2.
3.
4.
the host contract is a sale or purchase contract denominated in the functional currency of
the reporting entity
the amount of functional currency is determined using the relevant forward exchange rate
(to the date of delivery) at the date the contract is entered into
the embedded derivative is a forward currency contract to buy or sell the applicable amount
of the contract currency for the functional currency, at the same forward exchange rate.
The effect is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is initially zero
subsequent changes in the fair value of the embedded derivative are recorded in profit or loss
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
5.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.151
on delivery of the non-financial item, the host contract is fulfilled and the embedded
derivative is effectively settled. A foreign currency debtor or creditor is recognised for the
contract amount, translated at the spot rate in accordance with Ind AS 21.23(a). The closing
carrying amount of the embedded derivative is added to the functional currency amount of
the host contract to give the initial carrying amount of the debtor or creditor.
Option and non-option based derivatives
4.
A.
Non-option based derivatives
The terms of an embedded non-option derivative, such as a forward or swap, must be determined
so as to result in the embedded derivative having a fair value of zero at the inception of the hybrid
contract. Non-option based derivatives represent obligations of the counterparties to a contract.
Fair value of a financial instrument is a combination of its intrinsic value and time value. In a fair and
perfect market, it would be inappropriate to conclude that immediately at the inception of a contract,
it results in creation of rights and obligations for two independent parties i.e. the contract has no
intrinsic value at inception. Also, the time value starts accumulating only after the first day of the
contract.
The standard specifies that if it were permitted to separate embedded non-option derivatives on
other terms, a single hybrid contract could be decomposed into an infinite variety of combinations of
host debt instruments and embedded derivatives, for example, by separating embedded derivatives
with terms that create leverage, asymmetry or some other risk exposure not already present in the
hybrid contract. Therefore, it is inappropriate to separate an embedded non-option derivative on
terms that result in a fair value other than zero at the inception of the hybrid contract.
Further, in the case of non-option based derivatives, terms of the host debt instrument reflect the (a)
stated or (b) implied substantive terms of the hybrid contract. In the absence of implied or stated
terms, the entity makes its own judgement of the terms.
B. Option based derivatives
The economic behaviour of a hybrid contract with an option-based embedded derivative depends
critically on the strike price (or exercise price) specified for the option feature in the hybrid contract.
Therefore, the separation of an option-based embedded derivative (including any embedded put,
call, cap, floor, options or swap feature in a hybrid contract) should be based on the stated terms of
the option feature documented in the hybrid contract (unlike a non-option based derivative which is
separated on the basis of implied terms also). As a result, the embedded derivative would not
necessarily have a fair value or intrinsic value equal to zero at the initial recognition of the hybrid
contract.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.152
FINANCIAL REPORTING
If an entity were required to identify the terms of an embedded option-based derivative so as to
achieve a fair value of the embedded derivative of zero, the strike price generally would have to be
determined so as to result in the option being infinitely out of the money. This would imply a zero
probability of the option feature being exercised. However, since the probability of the option feature
in a hybrid contract being exercised generally is not zero, it would be inconsistent with the likely
economic behaviour of the hybrid contract to assume an initial fair value of zero. Similarly, if an
entity were required to identify the terms of an embedded option-based derivative so as to achieve
an intrinsic value of zero for the embedded derivative, the strike price would have to be assumed to
equal the price (or rate) of the underlying variable at the initial recognition of the hybrid contract. In
this case, the fair value of the option would consist only of time value. However, such an assumption
would not be consistent with the likely economic behaviour of the hybrid contract, including the
probability of the option feature being exercised, unless the agreed strike price was indeed equal to
the price of the underlying variable at the initial recognition of the hybrid contract.
The economic nature of an option-based embedded derivative is fundamentally different from a
forward-based embedded derivative (including forwards and swaps), because the terms of a forward
are such that a payment based on the difference between the price of the underlying and the forward
price will occur at a specified date, while the terms of an option are such that a payment based on
the difference between the price of the underlying and the strike price of the option may or may not
occur depending on the relationship between the agreed strike price and the price of the underlying
at a specified date or dates in the future. Adjusting the strike price of an option-based embedded
derivative, therefore, alters the nature of the hybrid contract. On the other hand, if the terms of a
non-option embedded derivative in a host debt instrument were determined so as to result in a fair
value of any amount other than zero at the inception of the hybrid contract, that amount would
essentially represent a borrowing or lending. Accordingly, it is not appropriate to separate a non-
option embedded derivative in a host debt instrument on terms that result in a fair value other than
zero at the initial recognition of the hybrid contract.
4.2.2.3 Accounting for embedded derivatives
If the flowchart given in paragraph "Separation of embedded derivatives" results in the conclusion
that the embedded derivatives are required to be separated, an entity shall measure the derivatives
at fair value at initial recognition and subsequently at fair value through profit or loss. [Paragraph
4.3.4 of Ind AS 109]
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.153
The initial carrying amount of the host instrument is the residual amount after separating the
embedded derivative. [Paragraph B4.3.3 of Ind AS 109]
As per paragraph 4.3.5 of Ind AS 109, if a contract contains one or more embedded derivatives and
the host is not a financial asset, an entity may designate the entire hybrid contract as at fair value
through profit or loss unless:
i.
ii.
the embedded derivative does not significantly modify the cash flows that otherwise would be
required by the contract; or
it is clear with little or no analysis when a similar hybrid instrument is first considered that
separation of the embedded derivative is prohibited, such as a prepayment option embedded
in a loan that permits the holder to prepay the loan for approximately its amortised cost.
These are two exceptions to the general principle that hybrid contracts can be measured at fair value
in their entirety, without separation of embedded derivatives. Refer explanation below for
interpretation of the phrase "significantly modify cash flows" mentioned above.
Further, as per paragraph 4.3.6 of Ind AS 109, if an entity is required to separate an embedded
derivative from its host (as per flowchart presented earlier in this paragraph), but is unable to
measure the embedded derivative separately either at acquisition or at the end of a subsequent
financial reporting period, it shall designate the entire hybrid contract as at fair value through profit
or loss.
If an entity is unable to measure reliably the fair value of an embedded derivative on the basis of its
terms and conditions, the fair value of the embedded derivative is the difference between the fair
value of the hybrid contract and the fair value of the host. If the entity is unable to measure the fair
value of the embedded derivative using this method, the hybrid contract is designated as at fair value
through profit or loss.
To conclude, picking up from the flowchart presented earlier in this paragraph, the accounting
implications are demonstrated in the flow chart at next page.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.154
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Is the hybrid contract designated at fair value through profit or loss in its
entirety (paragraph 4.3.5 of Ind AS 109)?
No
Yes
Can the fair value of
embedded derivative be
measured reliably?
Yes
Measure embedded
derivative and allocate
residual to host
Don't separate
embedded derivatives
No
Is the entity able to
measure the fair value of
the hybrid contract?
Yes
No
Is the entity able to
measure the fair value of
the host contract?
Yes
Fair value of embedded
derivative = Fair value of
hybrid contract minus fair
value of host contract
Entire hybrid instrument
is measured at fair
value through profit or
loss
Reassessment of Embedded Derivatives
An entity should assess whether an embedded derivative is required to be separated from the host
contract and accounted for as a derivative when the entity first becomes a party to the contract.
Subsequent reassessment is prohibited unless there is a change in the terms of the contract that
significantly modifies the cash flows that otherwise would be required under the contract, in which
case reassessment is required. An entity determines whether a modification to cash flows is
significant by considering the extent to which the expected future cash flows associated with the
embedded derivative, the host contract or both have changed and whether the change is significant
relative to the previously expected cash flows on the contract.
Illustration 14: Contracts for purchase or sale of non-financial item
Key terms of contracts to buy/sell non-financial items
Company Z is engaged in the business of importing oil seeds for further processing as well as
trading purposes. It enters into the following types of contracts as on 1 October 20X1:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.155
Company Z is required to determine if the contracts entered into for purchase and sale of oil seeds
are derivatives within the scope of Ind AS 109 or are executory contracts outside the scope of Ind
AS 109.
Solution
Contract 1:
The following factors indicate that this contract does not meet the 'own use' exemption:
The contract permits net settlement, and
There is a past practice of a significant proportion (30 per cent in this illustration) of similar
contracts being settled on a net basis either in cash or by sale of the oil seeds prior to
delivery/shortly after taking delivery.
Therefore, this contract would fall within the scope of Ind AS 109 and should be recognised as a
derivative instrument as on 1 October 20X1. The contract would be in the nature of a forward
contract to buy 100 MT of oil seeds as on 31 March 20X2 at USD 400 per MT. Company Z would
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.156
FINANCIAL REPORTING
have to recognise the fair value changes (based on change in forward purchase rate) on this contract
in the statement of profit and loss at each reporting date.
Contract 2
Contract 2 also permits net settlement in cash. Further, there have been some instances of similar
domestic purchase contracts being settled net in cash in the past. However, these have been
infrequent in nature and insignificant in proportion to the total value of similar contracts (i.e.1 percent
in this illustration).
Company Z is in the practice of taking delivery of the oil seeds purchased under similar contracts
and using them for further processing in its plants.
This indicates that the domestic purchase contract meets the criteria for the 'own-use' exemption
and should be considered as an executory contract.
Therefore, this contract would not fall within the scope of Ind AS 109.
Contract 3
This contract is in the nature of a derivative contract transacted on a commodity exchange and is
required to be net settled in cash on maturity. Therefore, this derivative contract would be covered
by Ind AS 109 and required to be classified and measured at FVTPL.
*****
Illustration 15: Foreign currency embedded derivatives
Company A, an Indian company whose functional currency is, enters into a contract to purchase
machinery from an unrelated local supplier, company B. The functional currency of company B is
also. However, the contract is denominated in USD, since the machinery is sourced by company
B from a US based supplier. Payment is due to company B on delivery of the machinery.
Key terms of the contract:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
11.157
Company A is required to analyse if the contract for purchase of machinery (a capital asset) from
company B contains an embedded derivative and whether this should be separately accounted
for on the basis of the guidance in Ind AS 109. Also give necessary journal entries for accounting
the same.
Solution
Based on the guidance above, the USD contract for purchase of machinery entered into by company
A includes an embedded foreign currency derivative due to the following reasons:
The host contract is a purchase contract (non-financial in nature) that is not classified as, or
measured at FVTPL.
The embedded foreign currency feature (requirement to settle the contract by payment of
USD at a future date) meets the definition of a stand-alone derivative - it is akin to a USD-
forward contract maturing on 31 December 20X1.
USD is not the functional currency of either of the substantial parties to the contract (i.e.,
neither company A nor company B).
Machinery is not routinely denominated in USD in commercial transactions around the world.
In this context, an item or a commodity may be considered 'routinely denominated' in a
particular currency only if such currency was used in a large majority of similar commercial
transactions around the world. For example, transactions in crude oil are generally
considered routinely denominated in USD. A transaction for acquiring machinery in this
illustration would generally not qualify for this exemption.
USD is not a commonly used currency for domestic commercial transactions in the economic
environment in which either company A or B operate. This exemption generally applies when
the business practice in a particular economic environment is to use a more stable or liquid
foreign currency (such as the USD), rather than the local currency, for a majority of internal
or cross-border transactions, or both. In the illustration above, companies A and B are
companies operating in India and the purchase contract is an internal/domestic transaction.
USD is not a commonly used currency for internal trade within this economic environment
and therefore the contract would not qualify for this exemption.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
11.158
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Accordingly, company A is required to separate the embedded foreign currency derivative from the
host purchase contract and recognise it separately as a derivative.
The separated embedded derivative is a forward contract entered into on 9 September 20X1, to
exchange USD 10,00,000 for at the USD/ forward rate of 67.8 on 31 December 20X1. Since the
forward exchange rate has been deemed to be the market rate on the date of the contract, the
embedded forward contract has a fair value of zero on initial recognition.
Subsequently, company A is required to measure this forward contract at its fair value, with changes
in fair value recognised in the statement of profit and loss. The following is the accounting treatment
at quarter-end and on settlement:
Accounting treatment:
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
*****
